so Ray is just like Look Backwards last
500 years of History every time every
time you've gotten to this point where
you're gliding uh it it always ends with
either economic war or actual hot
Weaponry war and you need this level of
trauma so that people will finally go
fine everything that I owed I'm I'm just
going to let go of it whatever it is
what it is I just want peace and so you
get this complete upending of everything
we reset we go back to zero but we do it
in the most grueling brutal sacrificial
way possible me and and I hear this a
lot from people like ah this all
rebalanced in 100 years sure but that is
cold comfort to Millennials who could
never buy a house right like
so yes but this is where the fourth
turning comes to me right I think we are
at economic
Warfare everybody needs an enemy so
we've decided that China Russia whoever
we want to be our enemy is our enemy
so we are economic Warfare for the share
of the
pi but the world is not it's not
actually a fixed Pi there's an abundance
and that abundance is the other economic
Warfare which is technology but that's
happening at a massive scale and it's
going into space it's going everywhere
so we've got physical kind of
warfare economic Warfare over technology
which is what Taiwan is all about you
know they own the secret code which is
the ability to produce um computer chips
uh in ways that nobody else can
replicate so there's
that and
then we are at war with each
other as the population is split and
wants to blame each other for what has
happened when in fact it was actually
the Baby Boomers that actually caused
the problem in the first place the
people caused the problems with the
People In fairness it was the greatest
Generation that had all the sex that
gave birth to the Baby Boomers that
created the problem and this is where it
gets tricky because God bless the
greatest Generation for fighting the
wars etc etc okay before we keep going
down that road cuz I I want to keep this
all in the construct of your um
everything code this was very
enlightening okay so you just walked us
through uh that first part about why
we're going to keep having these
Financial crises and the only way out of
that uh is to print money basically uh
okay next section and the only way here
we go and the only way of solving this
uh is putting it on the central bank
balance sheet because there's not enough
GDP to pay the interest this is what
you're just talking about so if you
think about GDP growth let's call it 2%
and let's assume that interest rates are
2% which is roughly where they've been
since 2008 so if the government is 100%
GDP in debt and GDP grows at 2% but
interest payments are also at 2% that's
all of GDP growth just to pay the
interest on the US government debt but
the private sector excluding the
financial sector so households and
corporations
are another 120% of GDP in debt uh well
that will give you negative growth every
year of 2% and adjust com compounds so
what happens is those interest payments
go to the FED balance sheet and they
monetize it again this is what we were
just talking about so then the private
sector is not competing with the
government and that was provable across
all major economies it's like they all
decided that they're they're too far in
debt and the only way to solve this is
quantitative easing and then I started
thinking well if I know this be true and
I know that the central bank balance
sheets are 97% correlated with the asset
prices well all I need to do is use
forward-looking indicators to predict
the central bank balance sheets Andor
interest
payments dude talk to me about this 97%
correlated with assets that that seems
like having a crystal
ball so it doesn't actually reflects
today so you could basically as I
explained before
the thing that's actually driving the
S&P 500 is the Fed balance sheet it's
not companies getting say driving you
mean driving the price correct so it's
an optical illusion it's a money
illusion so the price simply Rises to
meet the level of inflation caused by
printing money correct you're
readjusting the
price so that is what's going on
and so then when you understand that and
it's
97% you understand that nothing matters
apart from this liquidity which is what
I've been trying to tell people is sorry
all your economic models are wrong yes
you need to forecast the business cycle
to know where you are in the probability
of printing money cycle but that's all
that matters and it drives assets and
that's why people right now are getting
very angry because the stock market's
going up and they're like don't you know
there's a recession yeah I know that the
answer to recession is more cowbell
printing of more money which is why
explain people this this is what I'm
talking about with as people become
aware of these issues as you zoom out
and you see the gigantic crater you
begin to realize oh we're in a recession
that means they're going to print money
so in a recession prices are going up
and people are like yeah I know where
this goes so that's crazy and that it
it'll be very interesting to see what
the KnockOn effects are of the um
Everybody becoming aware of these
patterns and I've heard you say that uh
it's almost always the path of most pain
is the the path that ends up actually
happening and so as we begin to predict
oh this is what's going to happen the
fact that we can predict will have some
very sort of painful uh consequences the
important point being here is is I know
what drives
liquidity it's driven by the business
cycle and there are certain cycles that
are forward-looking the Chinese credit
cycle happens to lead by about 18 months
or two years for people that don't know
what the business cycle is can you give
a quick primer the business cycle is the
EB and flow and economic activity that
occurs and that's a boom and bust a
recession expansion is it caused by
interest rates
we don't really know what causes the
business cycle it's caused partly by
interest
rates it's caused by excess production
excess inventories to limited
inventories too there's many things that
can can drive a business cycle but it's
observable and has been observable for
Millennia and one of the things we do is
when the business cycle is too hot and
inflation starts Rising central banks
tend to rise raise interest rates that
tends to bring down economic activity I
think even without a central bank
interest rates would rise naturally um
because I think the free market can set
interest rates without central bank and
then the economy slows down again and we
see this this endless cycle so what I
think my hypothesis is is that okay this
is very observable I think it's going to
last this relationship between assets
and the central bank balance sheet
because of the mechanism of debasement
of currency
and I can forecast out what the business
cycle looks like and I also know the
amount of interest payments that need to
be made because that that happened three
and a half years ago and I can see how
far the balance Sheet's going to expand
so the balance sheet right now is what
$6 and a half trillion dollar and it
looks like it will get7 trillion do or
so and it looks like it will get to 12
to4 trillion do by the end of
2025 so that puts and there's a number
of other ways I've proven this out in
this whole thing and I'll send you the
whole piece uh myself I've not really
gone public with all all of the whole
thing of how it works but in the end
that
puts asset prices massively higher than
here hugely higher um so we're looking
at more than a doubling of the NASDAQ
from here we're looking at another
gigantic crypto run that's into 2025 so
we're seeing huge moves that just come
from the
debasement and I've gone through in the
everything code article that I wrote for
Global macro investor which is my kind
of Premium research service in that I've
gone through various ways of proving
this all out um so that's what I think I
can do but your observation I think is
really important okay when people I mean
I've sent this to quite a few people and
obviously the subscribers of global M
investor are kind of L the world's most
famous hedge fund managers um asset
managers and I think it it really
shocked people and resonated with with
people they're like oh my God everything
makes sense now and so once you see it
it all makes sense um now as it becomes
more public as a thesis and Mike how at
crossb capital's been talking some
elements of this liquidity you can see
liquidity becoming part of the the
conversation on financial Twitter and
stuff
now what I think we'll probably do is
create boom bus
Cycles again you can't have the bus
cycle going below the level of central
Bank liquidity because optically they
make it rise this is what people don't
yet understand but of course the stock
market should go down 90% can't
happen literally can't happen because of
the debasement it's a money
illusion but what I think we'll do is
see hey off we go to the races that's
what happened in 2018 2018 sorry 19 uh
early 20 we actually diverged from the
central bank balance sheet
uh massively because people starting to
figure out this game which is the moment
the FED stopped the tightening cycle
markets take off because they know that
the probability of more cowbell more
more Central Bank printing of money more
interest rate Cuts is coming and so
therefore we get boom bust Cycles so the
boom times are too big and then you get
a bust and we people know that from
crypto as well the long-term Trend
remains intact but we we keep getting
these huge booms collapse boom collapse
but the trend is still up I think that's
what we'll see we'll be more like the
crypto cycle which is pretty much what
we've just seen as well we had a big
collapse last year and now we're
straight back into the boom as we're
starting to forecast this all right so
uh let me see if I'm tracking all of
this sorry there is a lot in this no man
there there is but the the more I go
over this stuff the more times I
encounter it the more I'm I'm really
beginning to piece together what's
happening uh it it is though leading me
to a level of distress it does not make
me calm and it's leading me to a level
of distress while I agree with you when
you start looking beyond the next 20
years it it evens back out and and we
hopefully get the exponential Age and
and that works out but I I think there's
such a a period of tumult that
no yes okay let's get down to an
individual level let's not get to
societal level I can solve can unfuck
your future which is the series that we
ran on real Vision by simply offering
you the right
asset you get caught in this trap if you
own crypto or technology you will
outperform this entire thing now if
you're not wealthy enough to buy you
know set of a brokerage account doing
that because it's complicated for you
you can do it with crypto for no money
and you will
participate not only in the in the trend
of debasement so you're not getting left
behind because if you're just getting an
income and you're not buying any assets
you're truly going getting behind so
your 401k may look like the S&P 500
that's not making you any richer just by
technology or by crypto and those are
the only two assets that outperform the
central bank balance sheet so there's
your solve at a personal level all right
societal level before we can get into
that I think we have to track we have to
track why uh let's recap why you get
this uh the stock market rising and
falling with the printing of money so
you've covered that very well but just
by quick recap uh as you pump money into
the system then the costs of the assets
are necessarily going to rise because
they are a scarce asset and as there's
more money available those prices are
going to rise they're going to rise in
proportion and so you can just watch
them rise and lower together uh now the
reason why and I'll say Bitcoin maybe
instead of crypto just because there's a
lot of things going on in crypto that
get a little dodgy and so I'll Focus uh
while this I don't think Bitcoin I'm not
a Bitcoin maximalist by any stretch of
the imagination but bitcoin's a clear
way of describing this correct so when
you look at Bitcoin the reason and you
were the first person to show me a chart
that basically shows the the price of
Bitcoin goes up as money is pumped into
the system and it it's interesting that
it tracks in the same way that the stock
market tracks but for the exact opposite
reason so the reason that the price of
Bitcoin is going going to go up is
people are like yo I need to be
somewhere where I can't have my value
debased through the creation of
additional right so printing of money so
when you print money buying power goes
down because prices rise in commensurate
with the amount of money going into the
system so you feel like you're getting
richer but you're not it's an illusion
God I love that you use that word okay
so people then pour into Bitcoin because
they're like there will only ever be 22
million that that's just it and so since
I know that that's it that it is a
finite cap it will never go more then
you can't debase it through the printing
of additional Bitcoin okay so people
flood into that and you see it rise and
so that was the first time because I was
like people were speculating what is
bitcoin what does its price respond to
and once you pointed out it responds to
the M2 Global money supply I was like
okay that makes a lot of sense so um
walk people through then how to play
that game well why technology I that we
haven't addressed yet so why technology
um and how do you do Bitcoin well is it
a Buy and Hold You trading what does
that look
like so if with Bitcoin I treat
it as an asset that is going to protect
my long-term wealth and that sounds
crazy when it goes up and down like it
does right and you've just gone through
that full first cycle and you're like oh
oh oh oh but what you'll find is the low
is higher than the last time it it hit
the bottom and then the next low will be
higher and each high is higher oh it's
in an uptrend so I just don't need to
sweat about the ups and downs what I
should do is just accumulate every time
it's in a down
cycle why well because the down cycle
signifying that economic contraction is
happening and the world is slowing down
and money is being taken out of the
system quantitative tightening which is
the opposite process and assets fall and
interest rates are going up so your
disposable income's going down because
your wages aren't going up enough and
interest rates have gone up
more so it's at that point you know the
outcome is if economic activity is going
to slow down the next year in NE in a
year's time they're going to be printing
money or cutting rates because it's very
cyclical for the phenomena of this
rolling of this Deb so therefore you
should be buying more at these points
because then you've got the next upside
cycle to come which is what I've always
said is it's the cyclical Trend within a
secular
Trend okay this is guaranteed people do
not know the difference so secular trend
is something long-term Trend driven by a
large explainable
Factor cryp uh Bitcoin is an answer to
the fin Cal system and over time the
number of users and people who become
aware of its um of its superpower the
more people move
across that is a secular trend of e of
of adoption that's really
important the cyclical Trend the
cyclicality is the EB and flow within
it so that's the boom bust of the
economy not at a gigantic bust level
it's just a boom bus now Bitcoin harving
Cycles correspond with all of this why
is there some magic in that reduction of
Supply maybe but Bitcoin came out
exactly at the same time that all
interest rates went to zero they're all
part of the same
cycle so every time we get into this
economic cycle it affects Bitcoin in the
same way but over the long run the
adoption the secular cycle means it
outperforms everything because there's
no secular adoption of of the S&P 500
there's no secular adoption of General
Electric or you know that stuff's not
really happening yes there's an ongoing
purchasing by
401ks but that's really it
so so that big Mega trend is the
observable Trend that people can
participate in and it is going to more
than
offset what is going on with the
debasement of currency and that's to
do with meta's
law and the exponential trend of the
adoption of a technological Network or a
technology itself great so that's why
Bitcoin charts over time just keep doing
this it's because it's exponential the
S&P 500 doesn't do that because it's not
exponential but the NASDAQ does most
Technologies do and the reason why the
NASDAQ keeps outperforming the S&P and
keeps outperforming value stocks and
makes people so angry is because it's
all about the adoption of new technology
if you think about what's been driving
the NASDAQ recently it's the adoption of
AI obviously that's the fastest adoption
of any technology in history crypto was
the fastest beforehand but this is
eclipsed it it's gone from in six months
from basically zero users to 100 million
users in six months we've never SE like
it I want to put an interpretation of
what you just said forward and tell me
if this is accurate because I thought
your punchline was going to be the
reason that technology performs
outperforms the illusion of prices going
up uh is because it's an increas in
productivity per capita but what I hear
you saying with meta's law is it's
actually outperforming because of what I
will call you're going to hate this word
but hype that basically the people are
pouring into they're so excited oh my
God that's not what that's not what
meta's law is I know what's law is but
I'm saying if if you really think about
why meta's law would drive value that
exceeds the
illusion that is the only thing I can
take away from that because if it isn't
increasing productivity per capita why
would it otherwise out strip it is we'll
come on to that in a sec but meta's law
is the number of nodes on a network I
number of users of crypto
versus the number of applications in the
interconnection so the more we build out
a web three
world the more that that's the
multiplier as opposed to the people
initially it's the people who use it so
like Doge has no use case apart from
memes memetics but it has a bunch of
users um Bitcoin has limited use but a
huge amount of users as well but the use
case is very you know is very clear
which is the you know the scarcity of
the assets and the purity of the asset
and the security of the network ethereum
has lots of newes defi nfts all of this
stuff and a whole load of users so the
the this is what's driving these things
why are we adopting the technology
that's the productivity
equation the financial system becomes
more productive and safer and secur by
using cryptocurrency rails we become
superpowers as humans by adopting AI
robotics we become more productive in
ability to do stuff by adopting EV
technology we you know all of this stuff
is actually driving
productivity now here's another so I
need to push back on that so I don't
think it's it the value created in web 3
speaking of somebody is as in web 3 as a
human can be I've put just a gazillion
of my own dollars into this uh it's
right now it is all people betting that
this is going to be the future versus it
actually being the future right now so
that's why I say that's how you make
money my friend the moment I'm not is
right is the moment the bet the
investment
the there are use cases so let me just
let's just get out of the nft noise and
everything else I'm having dinner with a
friend of mine he used to run one of the
largest the trade operations is one of
the largest banks in
Australia it's a big Bank the equivalent
of Bank of
America and um he's like yeah you know
he's just reti he's like yeah I've been
heavily involved in crypto at the bank
doing stuff I'm like what do you guys
doing guys we've issued five stable
coins I'm like why why do you need the
stable coins why you know why not use
tether or usdc or whatever he's like
okay so this is what people don't
understand why crypto is so important
for the financial system he said we're
in Australia we have a gigantic pension
system our pension system buys a
gigantic amount of us
equities the US is about to you go to
settlement So when you buy a share and
you have to pay for it from T plus2 or t
plus3 so that's trade date plus three
days to pay for the bill to t+ one okay
that seems fine foreign exchange
transactions are T
plus2 they can't settle the US stocks
that they buy so they either have to
leave massive amounts of money with a
broker that they've dealt with who could
go Bust or use uses the money in
effectively or they create a stable coin
for instant
settlement so they can so and they've
built that this one is on top of
ethereum okay fine but that is a multi
hundred billion use case for why
crypto is very powerful for increasing
productivity within the financial system
alone and there's many of these all over
the place so why is tether such a big
useful stable coin you've basically
fractionalized the US dollar and allowed
a person in the Philippines who works in
a rice field to receive a payment from
his cousin who's living in New York City
instantaneously without any
cost in dollars which is the current
they all want that's mindblowing that's
why the stable coin system alone is so
gigantic so I don't agree with there is
no productivity or killer app the killer
app of crypto so far has actually been
stable coins and that so I want to make
sure what what I'm saying is is very
nuanced but I I don't think I'm being
clear enough yet so what I'm saying is
that um meta's law if the reason that
Tech has outperformed is because of
metaps law which remember I was
surprised to hear you say I didn't think
that's what you were going to say I
thought you were going to say
productivity but you said metaps law if
that's true and I'm just trying to
understand what the reality is and
you're saying this is how you make money
I hey I'm with you I'm just trying to
understand what this is in without fancy
uh Concepts just like the the down home
nitty-gritty so meta's law is as far as
I can tell that is the point at which it
is hype it's people getting excited now
they may be hyped for good reasons they
may be hyped because they're right about
where productivity is coming from but is
well then let me ask it this way for
those just listening he's shaking his
head uh is there a difference between
meta's law and productivity or to you
are they one and the same no they're two
entirely different concepts mea's law is
the value of a network and how to Value
it and the the value with those are two
very different statements is it the
value of the network or is it how you
value its future uh
utility every vote that goes into a
market I every time price moves is a
vote about current expectations and
future expectations so it's difficult to
pass out what that means but I've
provably shown that I can distill meta's
law pretty simply inry cryptocurrency to
two things number of active
users okay that makes sense that's the
nodes mhm and then the value of the
economic activity and all I did was the
dollar
value that gets exchanged every month or
week those two numbers multiplied out
gives this crazy ridiculously large
number but that when you put on a graph
is exactly the same as price and so it's
remarkable because price is not in that
equation
so law take in the the math that you
were just saying the value of the
transactions on the network it's the
it's the it's
basically no meta's nobody knows how to
fully measure a meta's law value system
so you need to approximate it because
it's quite a complex mathematical
formula and you're dealing with
imperfect worlds where you can't put it
in but anyway that's nothing to do with
the
productivity people are flocking to the
technology because it
increases whether it's your productivity
or solves other solutions for you you
know so I'm gonna say that slightly
differently and this is where I'm
surpris it's very possible I'm missing
something you were so much more
thoughtful on this stuff than I am
currently but there still what I'm about
to say still seems true to me and that
is that uh meta's law is the is the
observable response to when people
people believe something is going to be
going to be amazing so take eth people
believe that building on ethereum is
going to be the future I'm one of them I
believe it to the core of my existence
but it hasn't
yielded that yet no that's not right
every mobile phone network is priced
Metal's law all networks are pric at
meta's law but but why can't they be I
think I don't think it matters Tom I
think you're getting caught in a in a
thing that doesn't really
matter what matters for the bigger
equation the two things that matter with
with um this whole thing is does does
Bitcoin protect you from
this issue of debasement the
mutualization of losses amongst
everybody yes okay fine nothing else
matters there
does it could it be formed part of what
I call the exponential age of
Technologies which could eventually
increase
productivity yes now they're not
mutually exclusive there's no you know
be is just a measurement of value of a
network but this productivity idea is
the big
one and the pro productivity idea is if
we can't change we can't keep increasing
the debt remember the magic formula was
population growth or productivity growth
plus debt growth we can't change the
population the debt growth's got too far
so we've got this one thing in the
middle is the only thing that can change
this entire
equation so what we can do is try and
grow that okay now let's step back and
say okay what's happening to the
world that's a really big change that
happened that the central banks are
looking like they're going to print
money to do and that's the Green
Revolution it's being driven by Europe
but it's being driven
elsewhere so yes climate change yes all
of the benefits of doing this but there
is a magic
outcome so
productivity let's say we use AI we can
do more stuff and you and I have talked
about this in the past right we can
expand now human knowledge in ways we
couldn't do before and Factory lines and
agricultural Machinery just basically
created more productivity per human okay
fine but the big equation in this is the
inflation adjusted price of oil which
let's call that
the the kind of best Benchmark for
energy input costs have been $40 in
inflation adjusted terms for 70 years 60
years so we've got a fixed thing here
which is can we put more output per
calorie or kogle of energy that is what
productivity is all
about so technology keeps rising and
that's great keeps
going but all of these governments are
focused on the other part of this
equation which is can I lower the cost
of energy because if you drop the cost
of energy from 40 bucks per per barrel
of oil equivalent to
10 you 4X
productivity and and there is your
solution and that is why they're pouring
trillions of dollars into this and we're
seeing what's known as rights law sorry
all these terms which is the increase in
output of a new technology has a
commment measurable decrease in the cost
and we're seeing that with all of the
green energy so it's just getting
cheaper and cheaper and cheaper and
cheaper now we can't scale it enough yet
but we know that there's nuclear there
going to be part of this equation
there's a bunch of things but over time
we will move away from that $40 fossil
fuel anchor and move to $10 so think of
the multiplier because technolog is
doing
this and the cost is doing that that is
that is what the productiv miracle that
is
coming you can reboot your life your
health even your career anything you
want all you need is discipline I can
teach you the tactics that I learned
while growing a billion- Dollar business
that will allow you to see your goal gos
through whether you want better health
stronger relationships a more successful
career any of that is possible with the
mindset and business programs and impact
Theory University join the thousands of
students who have already accomplished
amazing things tap now for a free trial
and get started
today so help me understand why didn't
the internet which still to me feels
like a productivity productivity Miracle
why didn't that um
change all of this why why isn't it
already the lily pad that you believe
the exponential age is going to be so I
think because it replaced
jobs you don't think AI is gonna replace
jobs yes I
do but I think the the the productivity
trend is a function of demographics as
well and I don't fully understand why
the internet didn't do that but it also
H out manufacturing jobs so there was a
a balance on aggregate what happened
within the economy so I'm thinking it's
on aggregate it wasn't enough to offset
these Mega trends that we talked about
that were driven by the demographics and
the debt and and the globalization so
I'm thinking it's that and so we have to
have an accelerant because technology
growth is not enough to offset
demographic issues
and that's what I'm thinking it probably
is you know we did create I mean Trend
rate of GDP has been falling so whatever
we've done with technology and the same
number of people roughly we don't seem
to have pushed up GDP
growth let me ask a really ugly
question hearing everything you're
saying
it seems like I know it's not but I I
I'm not yet sure why not why isn't the
baby boom generation dying off and
population
Contracting uh deflationary in a good
way it
is well then tell me more uh I thought
so population collapse my gut instinct
is that it's terrible um what's the
benefit the benefit is more stuff for
you and I our per capita GDP goes up and
it's observable in Japan it's observable
in Switzerland so GDP per capita goes up
and that helps offset some of these now
the problem is is per capita is a nice
economic
term but right now it acrs to Mega giant
companies so it's a way of
redistributing ruting that Capital
amongst the people which is important
which is why you know I believe in
things like web 3 Technologies because
it allows more people to participate in
ways that they couldn't participate in
before because if not Google captured it
all and apple capture it
all so I think there's a probability
that as the population
shrinks it it creates a slow down in
growth because of the magic formula but
if you can increase that productivity
element then we will be richer per
capita now there's a government problem
of how you distribute
that you know you need to tax
corporations more than they're being
taxed these giant corporations that pay
no tax most people with the average
business pay tax up to here but Google
pays I don't know what their marginal
rate attach is 5% that's wrong and
Amazon because they're benefiting from
the holding out of the American worker
in the technology boom and the people
aren't which is what's making people
angry now they're not doing it because
they're bad people it's just the set of
cards they've been dealt with it's been
incredibly attractive to be you know a
super large company particularly one
with a growing industry like
technology so I think net net you can
orchestrate
it that per capita GDP
Rises but you have to think about that
issue does it ACR to the people or
not what happens if the population is
declining but productivity doesn't go up
well then we just go Trend rate of
economic growth just keeps
falling and so the reason that that I'm
so I always assumed that the reason that
population falling was a problem is
there are fewer people that want to buy
your goods and the that's why it it
Hollows out the sort of uh GDP core
economic engine but as I think about it
it would also um it's interesting it's
going to create a weird sort of uh
feedback Collision but it would increase
wages so if there are fewer people for
companies to hire uh that's great for
the employees wages but if there are
fewer companies because there's no one
to sell anything to Now problem bad
assumption and this is I can see the the
IMF got into this whole mess as well and
everyone now says inflation's going up
as population dies out bad assumption
because
technology is in the business of
replacing
costs and they will just find ways to
employ less people I mean again you and
I have talked about this is like 10
years ago video editors and sound people
Etc were really
expensive but now we can do it on AI so
people have to do two or three jobs they
hustle it's it's changed the structure
of stuff and Technology you will just
keep looking for the cost and replacing
it it's it's it's Relentless it's the
biggest observable trend is once you
digitize things the cost goes to zero in
everything it touches inflation is a
generalized rise in prices the price of
eggs goes up the price of gas in your
car goes up you know the cost of
employing people goes up
Etc debasement of currency is this
really weird little
trick they things of fixed Supply or
relatively fixed
Supply go up immensely optically because
the price of the currency's
Fallen things of variable Supply like
wages corporate earnings don't and they
don't go as much so what you find is
after quantitative easing what happens
stock market goes up gold goes up
cryptocurrencies go up housing goes up
binart goes up all of that stuff
assets so assets are a way of storing
wealth that's what an asset really is so
in relative terms they've held their
price and the currency's Fallen makes
them look like they've gone up in price
it's not and this is what everybody gets
confused with this is why price earnings
ratios have gone up so much because the
earnings doesn't move as much as the
price of the asset because it's a small
fraction of it so pees keep going up the
more we debase currency if you want to
see another example you look at chart of
the Venezuelan stock market in
Venezuelan boulevards and it goes
straight up if you put it in US Dollars
it's actually down
99%
so so it doesn't create a generalized
rise in prices this is what everybody
confused because they think it they
thought it was an increase in the money
supply in a way that you and I could get
it we can go buy more stuff it doesn't
work that way all right so would
inflation happen though if you didn't
have de basement I am not a monetarist I
don't believe inflation is always and
everywhere a monetary
phenomena interesting I think it is a
supply demand phenomena Above All Things
some people claim it's a supply and
demand for money phenomena I don't
believe that because of the 1970s
inflation is as provable as it possibly
can be was driven by
demographics the Baby Boomers all hit 30
at the same time but their first house
their first car their
blah blah blah blah blah and that what
was C that's what
caused the inflation of the 70s we've
never had inflation like that before or
since because guess what we've never had
such a big cohort of 25 to 30 year olds
all at the same
time buy things that have a limited
Supply correct or buy anything because
they used to live with their parents and
before you know it they're buying
duplicate stuff because you live with
your parents there's one car or two cars
whatever it is right you leave there's
now another
car and you meet a girlfriend or a
partner there's another car so you've
now doubled the and you bought a house
so that's a second house that didn't
exist before that's why demographics are
deflationary and inflationary depending
where you are in the demographic cycle
okay this whole idea of demographics as
Destiny is really interesting here's a
question that I've never thought of
before would we run into a problem if
you could so one I let's put a finger on
uh de basement de basement is the
government creates money out of nowhere
and so they literally just make it up so
if we were back in the days of printing
you would just turn the printer on
that's why they call it printing money
though now it's just a database entry
but if we were back in the printer days
you would print more would we run into a
problem if we couldn't create more money
because more people are being born the
population is going up if money like I I
think about this sometimes with Bitcoin
that's what a dep that's what a
depression is a depression is when
there's not enough money for the demands
like literal money so what happens is
the opposite of the
debasement assets get devalued and
currency which is the thing that's in
scarce
Supply but the money is the thing that
everybody desperately
needs when that is Extreme that's a
depression what we're seeing now now is
the opposite so we've got
inflation
but they've reduced liquidity to try and
cool the
demand and okay people want preferring
to try and get hold of money as opposed
to assets and the price of assets has
gone down so they've actually done the B
the opposite quantitative tightening is
the opposite of quantitative easing so
theoretically if quantitative easing
causes assets to go up then quantitative
um tightening should make asset prices
go down because you're making currency
scarcer simple okay so one I I've asked
this question before but I forget the
answer how do they quantitatively
tighten how do they get money out of
Supply because they're not going around
burning paper dollars so how are they
doing it they're just buying it so
they're buying bonds from Banks or other
participants wouldn't that put money
into the system because at that point
they're buying something so sure
they selling off their bond inventory so
they're doing the opposite right so they
give people something but they take the
money and then they hold it correct so
that I wrote that down as you were
talking about a depression a depression
really isn't that the money goes away a
depression is that the money is now
locked in people's wallets bank accounts
whatever they still have it they're just
not moving it is that correct and you
can't get it For Love or Money you just
you want the money and so the depression
is is what all the assets fall in price
you know it's that it's the it's the
it's it's all supply and demand in
certain ways yeah it's all psychology I
mean this is the the utterly fascinating
thing that I'm sure we'll keep looping
back to okay so money isn't moving
during a depression and so I was talking
to Robert Breedlove about this and I
still have a nagging feeling as much as
I don't now with my limited
understanding I don't like that money is
being inflated right now with my limited
understanding I absolutely love Bitcoin
because I see how it's going to hold my
wealth over time but there is a part of
me that keeps asking the question am I
actually mad at them using this cycle
because if this game really is
psychology and we get all of the
Innovation and everything that we get
because
of
innovation and to get people to innovate
and I'm remembering now how Robert uh
swatted this down but I'll be curious to
hear your thoughts so I keep my default
position is that people innovate because
money is moving so you make something
and
people don't think that their money will
be worth more over time if they hold it
so it is not a good asset in that sense
they think it'll be flat that's how I
think most people think of it I think
inflation is sort of invisible no most
people don't account for it until you
get into a higher inflationary
environment and so they think of their
money as being flat in truth their money
is actually declining in buying power
because of inflation but they think of
it as flat at least I always have so I
think of my money as flat people think
of their money as flat so H if I want a
Kit Kat bar today I'm just going to give
you money for it and I'm gonna eat the
Kit Kat but if I think this is like the
the joke that people make about the guy
that bought a pizza for you know 20
Bitcoin or whatever it's like bro that's
$67 million you know or whatever at the
height and so so what a fool you were
that is when your money is depreciating
instead of inflating or deflating excuse
me instead of inflating so you've got
this trick that happens psychologically
when the banks put money into the system
you feel like your money is going to be
worth the same tomorrow that it is today
and so you don't have a problem spending
it does that seem crazy to you no so
it's all about this marginal propensity
to consume or to save or whatever and
that's your expected future value of
money the reason there's not a lot of
velocity of money in Bitcoin there's a
lot of
hodlers is that the general view is well
I'm going to be better off if I just
hold
it right which is why nobody's going to
use Bitcoin as a transaction layer apart
from lightning because it's just the
blockchain rails but why would
you because nobody wants to be the
Bitcoin pizza guy
so you don't so it's actually kind of
deflationary in that
respect
and all of this is a game it's a game
of who are the other competitors in this
game who
the the rules as you would call them
right okay we got the central banks they
want to do one thing to us we've got the
asset prices and they can do another
thing based and whatever is going on
there you know if you're investing
Commodities or equities or
whatever and I need to navigate that to
get to where I want to get
to and I have this base assumption that
my cash is going to be
flat so I put 10 grand in a bank I'm
assuming my 10 grand is worth 10 grand
we know it's not but in a one-year time
Horizon we don't really care if it's
worth two% less because we we don't
notice that so then we're looking at the
other levers and saying okay what is
going to deliver what Tom wants which is
I want my money to offset
debasement not inflation because
crypto's done a terrible job of that as
as everything including gold I mean
virtually nothing offset this inflation
we've just had so that kind of took us
all by
surprise but the debasement well I just
divide all of these assets by the FED
balance sheet that's really interesting
the S&P kind of goes nowhere it kind of
it's right at the bottom now since
2008 so as they started using the FED
balance sheet debasing the currency the
stock market has just accounted for that
the FED balance sheet has been doing
that the stock market's done that but
actually they've netted each other out
you haven't got any
richer um gold fails you've actually got
poorer versus the FED balance sheet so
the big gold narrative failed I don't
know no because probably because of
crypto so I people just had a less
marginal propensity to use it in a
digital age gold is not actually that
useful the NASDAQ did actually pretty
well we still went back up to 2008
levels or 2007 levels but it's been
going up why
technology technology is a secular Trend
the S&P 500 does not have a secular
Trend behind it so and then when you put
crypto crypto is the only thing that's
really outperformed because what you've
got there is you've got
technology and this kind of whole
network adoption
model and it works really well for
debasement of assets because it's scarce
technology companies aren't scarce
really you can just keep building them
but you can't do it here so it works
phenomenally well so you're taking the
bet that future Tom wants to not screwed
up and therefore future Tom wants to
choose the asset that he thinks best
represents the set of risk that he sees
being played at the table in the game
and that risk to you is debasement of
currency which I think is probably the
larger risk um and therefore Bitcoin or
crypto is the best bet to take but it
depends what what future you is
depending who who's watching this and
what they need because some people want
to protect some people want to
grow some people want to yeah there's
different motivations but generally it's
protect what you've got so you can
maintain your level of your who you are
because nobody wants to ratchet
down the reality or their expectations
of themselves there's psychology again
so velocity of money this is a very
interesting concept and I hope everybody
takes me as you would take somebody who
is learning something every time I get a
new piece of this puzzle it does feel
like the emotional ups and downs are
easier to deal with I won't say that I
feel that I'm better at predicting and I
do want to talk at some point before we
go about looking forward 18 months and
what that looks like but first I want to
contend with this idea of velocity of
money so the rate at which money moves
seems to be the thing that the FED is
trying to influence because they
understand the psychology so Roaring 20s
if if I had to guess high velocity of
money uh 1930s I know because you said
earlier that a depression is when the
money stops moving so depression low
velocity of
money I think it was Jerome Powell that
said recently I want to keep cranking up
rates because it will slow the economy
yes and if I go too far and I break a
bone that's okay because I have tools
that I know how to use to fix a broken
bone but I don't have tools basing your
currency exactly so but this goes back
to the velocity of money and so okay I'm
I'm put putting this all in context of a
guy who has a a a meaningful not a scary
but a meaningful part of my net worth in
Bitcoin because I believe in The
Narrative of it will hold value over
space and time there's an interesting
note there to be made about did Bitcoin
just inflate gold which is an utterly
fascinating thought and that 50 years
from now will there still be gold and
Bitcoin anyway so I I believe in Bitcoin
I believe in its ability to hold that
but I also have this feeling especially
now sitting in the soup of uh all this
madness has happened in crypto with
fraud yes it happens everywhere cool but
my punchline is that
regulation I'm always tempted by the
libertarian notion of just like don't
tread on me let me do my thing then I'm
like uh humans like they'll find the
edges there are psychopaths among us
even if SPF didn't mean to be a a just
absolutely ruinous psychopath like
that's what ended up happening and I can
only imagine the the human Agony expense
of nine whatever billion dollars that
ends up getting lost like whoa that just
absolutely devastating okay so sitting
in that soup I find myself going I'm
actually okay with a certain amount of
government I pay a lot of taxes I do
have a breaking point where I start to
get really annoyed and feel like it's
being overstepped and misused let me try
to put all the context on the table here
but I don't feel like just ah no
regulation is the right answer we need
some regulation to all of this to keep
people from going crazy but God is it my
ignorance that's telling me that the
central banks may not be the worst thing
ever oh I know how people that know more
than me are going to have a seizure
but I can't help but think think given
that this is a game of psychology given
how easy it is to sort of nudge humans
in a direction that they could clamp
down on their money be too paranoid to
spend it and that it isn't necessarily a
bad thing that we do have this tool to
nudge it now conspiracies the beast from
Jackal Island like I understand all of
it and so it's like it's all sort of
bad
but on
balance I come down on I don't know the
system seems reasonably functional
how crazy does that sound from your far
more knowledgeable perspective so
there's a few things first velocity of
money is as you say but it's a
demographic phenomena so velocity of
money has been super low since 2000 so
not influenced by the FED no interesting
whoa okay shocking you're you're
smacking my world view they have not
been able
to interesting
because
psychology who is hoarding Money Baby
Boomers the same people who cause the
inflation are causing the deflation or
disinflationary Trend because they're
hoarding money because they're now 75
years old and all you want to do is make
sure you don't die destitute at 85 or 90
right imagine if your homel at 85 right
so you are driven by one of the
strongest psych psychological factors
you have is I cannot get any worse than
I am
today right see you're hard stop so you
won't spend so the baby booms have
stopped velocity of money and I've
proven this with charts over time that
that's what's causing it that's why
we've got this disinflationary trend in
the world even though we we're in a
temporary inflationary Trend and it's
been that that the FED have debased
currency to try and offs set the Baby
Boomers have and I did this whole long
two and a half hour thing that people
should watch on the real Vision YouTube
channel with Robert breed love about why
we got here it's a very long two and a
half hour video and I can't tell you how
important it is but the Baby Boomers
with the debasement of currency over
time found that their income didn't go
up but the assets did because there was
too many of them competing for these
assets this is before the basement and
so they borrowed money to f the Gap when
we started the big debt boom it was all
driven by this demographic so yeah go
and check out that video it's I think
it's pinned to the our YouTube channel
that that that's a big issue here it's a
bigger issue with this demographic game
because that's one of the rules of the
game that you can't change so what
happens over the next 15 years as
Boomers start dying they will get
firstly
more propensity to not spend so when my
dad retired dad used to quite like
spending money you know he he was
reasonbly you know he was a middle class
reasonably did reasonably well not
phenomenally well and what happened the
moment he retired he's like [__] this is
a fixed sum of money I don't know how
I'm long I'm going to live for and my
wife's probably going to outlive
me so his spending pattern probably in
two years fell 65% W you know he was the
guy who buy champagne he'd go out for
dinner with friends buy a bottle of
champagne whatever blah BL blah you know
by the time he hit
76 he'd be on
the 5 special at the
supermarket because he just didn't want
to not run out of money the worst thing
for him is him to die which he did and
leave my mom with no
money because then his whole sense of
self is tied up in so anyway so it's
really strongly driven by these kind of
thing so I think as they get older it
get actually gets worse but they are
going to die we've got I'm going to
guess 15ish years and then they start
dropping like flies that's right and
that's so then we've got the other issue
right which is depopulation of the world
right that's coming at
scale but this gets offset by technology
so if you look at Amazon warehouses
Amazon is employing robots at a faster
rate than humans and the robots there's
now half a million of them and one and a
half million people work for Amazon but
the robots work three times as many
hours and are probably twice as
productive so and they never have a
holiday nothing
right so that's going to happen at scale
and replace the Baby Boomers but what's
going to happen when the Baby Boomers
money floods into the system I mean
that's I heard some crazy number about
how much money Baby Boomers have locked
but they're going to give that I mean
charity kids whatever but it's it's
going to come in in a pretty rap I've
heard this story before there's one
economy that's LED everything that's
Japan the issue was is that people start
living longer the Japanese actually
passed on the
wealth to their retired
kids whoa that was the
problem because if you had your you
lived to 90 and you had your kids at 20
your kids are 70 by the time you die wow
wow and so they didn't get the wealth
effect of the part change over in wealth
now not every economies as long living
as Japanese and the Americans are 40c
longest living it's
inexcusable um you know considering GD
how much they spend on Healthcare as a
percentage of GDP it's inexcusable what
happens in the US but you just can't eat
like that I'll just say it yeah you
can't eat like that and you can't have
the the drug companies involved as far
as they are um so I don't know if
there's a big wall of money coming Tom
that's almost more scary and I think
people's jobs get replaced by technology
but I think there is a productivity boom
which we've not had for a long time
because of this retired population and
debt I think this what I call the
exponential age this rise of
Technologies may give us more wealth per
GDP so it'll manifest itself in ways
that we don't know now it doesn't matter
if it's stuck right because as long as
it's in a pension fund that's investing
in VC that's driving technology it's
okay I mean the worst thing to happen is
you spend it on bags of chips and cans
of drink because then you're creating
food inflation what you actually want is
it to create GDP growth so by Pension
funds lending it or giving it investing
in companies VC companies you're
fueling new technology New Wealth new
GDP okay so that brings me back to uh
velocity of capital people putting funds
into the market if you could snap your
fingers and make central banks go away
would you probably not I'm kind of like
you I'm actually quite Centrist in most
things I can see the absurdities of of
everything but given the basket of stuff
I asked many people who were like I hate
the fed I'm like okay 2008 what would
you have done well wouldn't have got
there in the first place I'm like okay
but they did and how do you get there in
the first place well and again watch
that video with with Robert breed love
I'm like well that was a factor of um of
globalization would you have stopped
that and foreseeing the outcome of that
and then that was a function of the Baby
Boomers in World War II and there was so
many factors it's like no they're doing
the best that they can now nobody wants
want the debasement of
currency but if you don't what is the
outcome that's what I ask people if you
don't buy the
debt if you allow the collateral of the
system because the US is the most
indebted economy in the history of the
world as a percentage of world GDP whoa
it's over 100% of world's GDP in
debt that's a lot and that's not just
that's the country the people
corporations right it's the whole lot
the total
debt so what do you want to
do what do you want to do do you want to
let all of that collateral go to zero
the whole system burn to the ground and
a complete destruction of Lifestyle even
whether we're living in a fantasy
lifestyle driven by debt and other stuff
do you want to destroy all of
that I don't think you would I don't
think anybody would so in which case you
need need the central Banker to try and
just juggle the bloody Bulls in the air
and yes we get angry because it kind of
gets the rich gets richer because it
keeps driving those assets up and the
poor get poorer so we have to focus
somehow on that but America doesn't like
the idea of helping poor people they
think it seems to be you're a communist
it's ridiculous you know why would you
not have a welfare state if you've
destroyed the ability for wages in real
terms to rise over the last 50 years
they've not risen at all so you need to
think about this and this is why
technology people are thinking about
Universal basic income because these
same people in the work force are going
to compete against robots they have no
chance zero chance so there is a lot of
structural issues here and I don't think
you can do this without government and I
don't think you can do it without
central banks and I don't think central
banks they've made some mistakes some
big mistakes they made a mistake in
1997 which was cutting interest rates to
defend the stock market The Leverage
hadn't built as big by
then and we could have had a clearing
event and The Leverage wouldn't build up
that's what's happening in crypto right
The Leverage can't build up it just
cannot do it because it keeps getting
blown out why because there's no
counterpart but look at how vicious the
Cycles are so do you want the whole
economy to go through the crypto cycle
well you can do that that's not having a
central
bank there's so tradeoffs as you as you
suggest so I think for a generalized
population you would
trade smoothness
and some level acceptable level of
debasement or inflation whatever you're
looking at some acceptable
level versus an economy that does this
and you can't you don't know when to
save or how to invest because the wealth
I don't even think we would get there I
think think people would Turtle up so
fast you would just be in protect mode
man even just looking at so I as
somebody who but this is gonna make us
really hated this video Tom by because
we're both saying the same thing and
people are gonna go how dare
you they're doing I get it and that's
the thing I wanted people to know like
hey the beast from Jackal Island the
conspiracy like I they may even all be
true let's just assume for now that they
are true all of it is still born out of
the nature of the human animal and
they're having now been in uh I'll say
blockchain instead of crypto because the
part that I function in is very much not
a currency looking at that and going hey
I I'm totally down for some rules I
would just like to know what those rules
are I don't want to have to guess at
what the rules are and then you come
later and you're very angry so I like to
just let's have what the rules are we
can debate the rules we can fight about
the rules all that but now we can move
forward in a a far more reasonable way
but I don't think that things settle on
stability if you have the ability for
the more powerful that could be physical
could be intellectual like I I really
think Sam bankman
freed has a talent for being able and
and it could be just of this moment
where that sort of He's Got The Geek
Chic look he's I've never I I actually
haven't even seen an interview with him
but I will assume that what I hear is
correct that he's a very smart guy he's
certainly able to convince people that
he's a smart guy so he understands
something about this that he was able to
leverage against other people and I
think that will always happen and what
governments are is basically and this is
going to sound terrible but governments
are the weaker people saying well we're
going to get our asses handed to us
physically intellectually so let's come
together as a collective and as much as
like that can spiral into tyranny I'm
well aware as somebody who runs a
business in California let me tell you
how aware I am of that there is a
pathological side on that side but I
think there's a pathological side on
this side and if we're going to find a
real path forward I think people need to
understand the rules of the game I think
we have
to stabilize the rules of the game I'm
going to add some complications to this
too please of of course so one of the
arguments about the FED that people have
is they're not elected
officials and therefore we should have a
say how much our currency gets debased
or
whatever but the crowd is not always
very good at making these decisions
either and brexit is a great
example brexit the unintended
consequences have been enormous I don't
know anything about it so what have been
the second and third order consequences
so there was yeah all these Brits love
to go on holiday to Spain France Italy
they had all their holiday homes they
got to retire they wanted to spend you
know six months a year in one country
and now they're finding they're not
allowed to and they have to
leave and they're like what but we're
British how dare you and we're like no
no you're not part of the EU anymore you
have no rights you have no rights over
the Health Care System there they're
like well this is not what we agreed to
at the Border in France you can drive a
a car from France to Spain to Italy to
Austria do anything you want you don't
even go to passport control Brits at the
Border in huge long lines getting in and
have to produce all the right papers
they're like but we're British how dare
you like you've You' voted
out so normally
speaking that should have been done not
as a
referendum it should have been done as a
political process and that was going on
as a process that takes years of debate
and discussion and voters can say we
like that party because they're against
leaving or for leaving and that's fine
but it gets debated properly over an
extended period of time what we did was
say you make decision instantly and
everyone was like well okay completely
not given the
tools and they screw up so do we want to
give the same tools to everybody with
interest
rates do they even know what drives the
economy now I don't think the FED are
particularly good with that either I
think they do a terrible job on
forecasting the economy and that's why
you know finwick gets so angry with them
is like it's bloody obvious we're going
into recession and you won the battle on
inflation but you're going to keep
fighting and you're going to make it
worse for people and then people are
going to lose their jobs and going to be
angry at you again and just and so on
and so so forth but nobody's ever
managed to make the business cycle flat
nobody it's a degree of what volatility
you'll accept when I started um doing
the research for this interview
obviously you and I interact quite a bit
but when I started doing the research
for this interview I thought I would
hear a lot more pessimism out of you
about recession about you know uh global
economic collisions from Russia and
Ukraine to China and that looked like
they were imploding for a while but
you're pretty optimistic
so I'm very curious um what's happening
right now so first most people need to
realize that Doom porn
cells it catches attention fear is the
strongest human emotion right and so you
see a lot of it because it grabs
attention so we need to break apart two
parts here one is what do I think of the
economy and the other is what do I think
about markets so my economic view is I
think most of us even know it is we're
in recession we're in recession and it's
probably going to get a bit worse and
there's a lot of people going to lose
their jobs and businesses are going to
find it hard um there's less money
around and it's going to be pretty
miserable um and it's the sort of
miserableness that you go through
periodically that is not
catastrophic so it's a recession and
recessions
are as old as Humanity itself
so we've just had what's confusing
people in my
view is we're so screwed up by the last
three
events one was the
pandemic so there's no normality what
was the recession look like there that
was the weirdest one then 2008 was the
end of the entire Financial system and
then 2001 was this spectacular tech tech
collapse so people have an anchoring
bias it's like well it's the end of the
world really when I started when I
graduated University it was
1990 and it was a terrible time to
graduate because it was a recession and
there were no jobs and I wanted to go
into finance and they were firing people
as fast as possible and it took a while
it took a while house prices went down
for a while and people didn't get jobs
for a while and people were laid off for
a while and the stock market went down
20% there a decent size recession as
well went down 20% took some time to
recover the jobs came back the economy
was cleaner they got rid of some of the
worst excesses of Leverage and the world
moved forwards and before you knew it
all of the 90s was a
boom I'm kind of of that opinion is we
have no systemic collapse coming we
don't have those kind of issues and
we've invented the magic printer the
money printer of quantitative easing
that papers over all
troubles so we don't have that coming
Society yeah we got a whole bunch of
issues to get through a US election with
all this Ai and the anger and the
populism but forget all of that again
you can easily go down the Doom or you
can enjoy the community you've got
around you and there's different ways
you can have lenses perspective on the
world
investing the job of markets is to look
forwards if you tell me 100% of all
economists are forecasting recession
it's kind of no [__] Sherlock
um and therefore is it in the price or
is are all those stock market people
really stupid all of those machine that
they haven't heard you at all no they
actually understand this and it's a
realtime probability waiting business it
kind of knows that and what it looks
forward to is okay how bad is this is it
catastrophic is the world going to end
what's going to happen and the markets
are telling you no it's probably done my
my view is the bottom is in in markets
and the bottom was in in crypto in June
and for Bitcoin was in October November
the bottom was in for the stock markets
in October as most end of bare markets
happen it priced in a
recession and we move forwards from here
and eventually they'll cut rates again
and if you think about it is we had a
total shutdown of the global economy
then a reopening of the global economy
that caused this inflation that's hurt
everybody and eventually we'll just
rebalance back to some form of normality
there's a massive amount of Doom porn
about inflation is going to be
structurally here forever we're all
going to die which is kind of I'm more
like you are with the AI side where I'm
actually like you know what we've just
developed AI we've got Relentless
technology the price of energy is coming
lower from all different sources
productivity of humanity is growing um
so I
think I think it's actually probably an
interesting time it's an interesting
time because everybody's so bearish
psychology plays a huge part in markets
because everybody expects inflation to
be relentless and ongoing and for the
rest of our lives much like what 24
months ago everyone was like every Tech
Stock's going up forever and every
businesses can never fail again we're
humans we make forecasting errors of
quite wide am at various points so yes
no I'm and I spend a Hu so I'm not just
saying this because I'm just chatting to
you I me I do an enormous amount of work
on this I write 150 pages of research I
sit down write it every month I've been
doing that for 19 years um and so that
comes with
2,000 charts models and stuff with
myself and uh uh my colleague Julian
Bittle from secular themes shortterm
them doesn't mean I'm not wrong as well
I can clearly be wrong but I just think
it's in the
price and what we the worst part of it
is is the stock market is going to be
going up probably it won't rock it up at
first but eventually it'll pick up while
we're all feding the
pain because people are looking forward
and so they're saying okay the Bottom's
in Now's the Time to get in we know
we're going to go up from here so even
though we're still sort of going through
it people are losing their jobs but wise
investors are like you just need to
project this out into the future yeah so
there's a Time Horizon of how the
business cycle works currently the thing
that leads it the most is the Chinese
credit cycle who knew but it is right
now 17 months ahead so when it turned up
17 months ago we're starting to say huh
okay there's something happening here it
also forecast the recession and then and
then you've got other forward looking
indicators about N9 months out um we've
got a bunch of
indicators but the the last thing in the
stack is rents and the one before that
is
Wages so wages are going up right this
now but they take a while and then they
start coming down again they won't
deflate nobody's going to really come to
you and force you to take a uh a pay cut
but it means that they they don't keep
going up but your rents will probably
come down um and so that's a function of
these things just take time the
unemployment rise hasn't even started
now we can see everybody laying off
every company's laying off people
thinking about tightening costs everyone
can see it from sponsorship advertising
sales I mean it's everywhere and every
single person I speak to is like Christ
it's miserable out there but the
unemployment side doesn't really come
until it should start in the next month
or two and then that goes on for nine
months of just relentlessly high
unemployment rates so anybody watching
this why is that so predictable why nine
months it's just how it always is
because companies make decisions and
whether it's around board meetings
however it's done they get to a certain
point where they hit the panic button um
and they lay people off that's usually
when the bottom of the recession starts
it's usually when rates start getting
cut it's usually when the stock market
often recovers as
well so for people watching
this there's two parts of this one is if
you're an investor you might be able to
buy these technology stocks with this
Renaissance of amazing changes happening
around us at prices down 70% from where
they were two years ago a year ago okay
that's kind of interesting because your
expected future return goes up same with
crypto you know you know I've talked
about this you buy when the Cy the
business cycle brings it back to the sub
the bottom of the secular uptrend that's
where we are these are where you make
all the money this is what you get paid
for to take risk here you you you don't
get paid to take risk at the top and you
tend to lose money so these are the
moments in time so that's very
interesting as an
investor but anybody watching this think
about your cash
flows think about the cash flow think
about your expenditure and just say just
be a little bit careful because losing a
job or having your own business
struggling for a period of time and I
think the worst of it will be over
relatively fast but yeah it's these
laggy me what's what's relatively fast
we're recording this in in March of
23 when do we think this turns around so
I think the bottom of the economic cycle
is in the next quarter so I think we got
a really ugly quarter to come but the
problem is it's that shock that sets off
the companies to go I need to love some
staff all of that and it's that process
that begins the healing so the what is
that shock so if that shock is isn't
people getting laid off what is the
shock that's coming in the next quarter
the shock coming in the next quarter is
is the general slow down from interest
rates you know biting into all of these
indebted companies or households or
credit cards and all of this stuff and
everybody goes uhuh I'm not going to
spend money that is what a recession is
you know it's not usually driven by a
pandemic it's not usually driven by the
entire Financial system collapsing it's
usually by all of us making a rational
decision of I'm just not going to spend
money right now because things are a bit
uncertain and that is what causes
recessions and I'm actually telling
people to do exactly that because it's
the rational thing to do what you do if
you're going to panic panic early and
I'm not talking about the stock market
going down either I think we've had that
it went down the NASDAQ went down
38% that's pretty much bang in line with
a regular bare Market but what I'm
saying is in your personal life where it
really matters where the rubber hits the
road is panic
early just look at your expenditure look
at your cost look at your business so
what do I need to do here uh just to
make sure that I can just get through a
pretty shitty year but 2024 probably
pretty
decent so what is the natural cycle of
things why do people begin to warm back
up and what are the threats if any that
you see looming so housing I'm
hearing housing bubble bursting problem
there Doom is that it it's just people
are overreacting not real the housing
market is
expensive interest rates have gone up so
people are going to buy less
houses yes will house prices come down
yes because they went up a lot will the
activity in the housing market dry up
for maybe two years yeah most likely um
are we going to see a leverage crash no
because nobody's really got a lot of
verage at household level in property
that was something that happened in 2008
it's been too expensive and too
difficult to do so I think the home
builders have a bit of trouble because
they got a lot of inventory they can't
sell it they need to finance it for a
couple of years it sits around 1990 9192
was very similar I was in London then it
was pretty shitty in the property Market
was great for me because I just entered
the property Market at the end of that
so prices were relatively low had come
down a lot but hadn't gone up a lot and
my income was going up because I was in
my 20s so income goes up every year cuz
you're hopefully getting promoted and
stuff like that so um but you know a few
property developers went bust things
were slow and then eventually it cleaned
up so I'm more of that opinion that you
know house prices come off 10% maybe
even 15% you know some areas that were
really hot come down a bit further but
it doesn't expose any catastrophic
leverage the banking system is more than
ad compensated with capital um it's
hugely solvent in the United States so
it's just a bad time it's just a bad
what do you think about about rates are
they going to continue to go up is there
because the FED as far as I know is
signaling that they are going to keep
taking rates up yeah so every single
forward-looking indicator that I have an
inflation suggests that inflation
utterly
collapses um if you want to see a
realtime inflation data look at
something called true flation
TR flation um actually on blockchain it
takes hundreds of thousands of
individual prices on a real-time basis
um and it tells you where inflation is
today and US inflation today is about
4.74% Wow versus the headline which is
over six so and if we think of what
inflation is is the year-on-year
comparison what happened last year Well
between March and June was Russia
invading Ukraine and every commodity
going through the RO so we're going to
see the flip side of that so we will see
inflation come off very fast all my
forward-looking indicators that that
look at it from different angles all
suggest the same so I think the FED is
speaking Max aggression because they
want to make sure that the out of the
Embers doesn't rise the Phoenix again so
they just want to Stamp Out people's
expectations of higher prices in the
future they know there's a recession
coming they can see the inflation's
coming so uh that um recession's coming
so I think it's the final game which is
like get down and stay down
um and then that that's what they've
done and so my guess is we'll be having
this conversation
in
September September somewhere between
September and December and they have cut
rates whoa you think they're going to
start cutting that fast so how does and
the market is telling you that that's
and the market and the FED are saying
that's wrong that's not true we're here
higher for longer but if unemployment is
going to rise they have two mandates
inflation unemployment inflation is
going to be falling and unemployment
Rising they cannot go to Congress and
say oh yeah we're just going to do this
a bit longer they're just going to fire
them all there is politics involved in
the end so no they will cut rates and
they should do by then for
sure so how is it though going back to
the idea of the Embers is the place from
which the Phoenix is going to rise and
you know we're going to go rocketing
back into Euphoria and end up back in
the same
spot How does cutting rates that soon
why not
hold you won't be asking for that in in
September you'll be begging them because
what's gonna happen if your friends will
be your friends will be losing jobs
people are you know getting decimated
there's houses in your street that don't
sell you're like really guys what do you
want to do destroy everybody that's
that's how it always works and then
also everyone's got a lot of debt all
the corporations in America plus the
households are 120% of GDP in debt and
the US government's 100% of GDP in debt
and they have that's the I want to talk
about so the when I think about the US
government and the amount of debt that
we're carrying and I think about
interest rates being this High it it is
there a conversation I know I'm asking
you to prognosticate here but is there a
conversation going on between the US
government and the FED of like hey get
ready to pull those rates down because
they thems eles have all this debt
service that they're going to have to
do yes and I think it's Global I'm I'm
I've just been developing I've written a
lot of that sorry I'm not punishing any
sentence I've just cut discovered
something that really quite shocks me
that I've been writing a lot about to
get my thought process in global macro
investor my understanding is
that all debt that the the US has
borrowed
above GDP growth so if GDP grows at 2%
and debt growth grows 4% everything
above is only for financing interest
payments since 2009 since the
recession and so that all of that money
is the exact same
amount as the size of the FED balance
sheet so they are issuing bonds to pay
the interest that's so that's paying
your credit card with another credit
card and then giving it to your dad and
say well you settle the bill whoa It's
which is the
Fed so I think they completely know
what's going on and and I haven't really
shared this with anybody yet I also
think it's Global and it's
understood and it's all smoke and
mirrors that we never saw what the game
was and I've think I've proven it that
this is all all the central banks did
this is what quantitative easing and
step back is what what am I talking
about in this scrambled nonsense that
I'm
saying the us but easy
maths long-term Trend rate of growth is
1.75% but let's call it
2% interest rates have been average
around 2% let's say for easy maths
and the government is 100% of GDP in
debt
so so therefore their interest payments
are 2% of the entire GDP which is how
much the economy grows okay put that
over there but you guys in the private
sector you're also 100% of GDP in
debt where does your 2% come from
because GDP is all of the activity in
the economy and that's just gone to the
government
sorry guys you're either going to go
Bust or we're going to blow up and
you're going to blow up the banking
system or or we're going to have to keep
eating this negative growth difference
of 2% every year until you get rid of
this debt and we're all
[__] so once you realize that these
two polls are both
100% you realize okay somebody is going
to have to do something so ends up in
the fair balance sheet so when you go to
Japan really interesting because Japan
the households are massive
Savers companies are pretty in debt but
the government's massively in
debt and it's the same but because their
interest rates are lower they can have
more
debt but their economy grows really slow
as
well so you get to a certain point and
then you have to say right it has to go
into the balance sheet the Europeans
have been doing the same the Brits have
been doing the same it's all the same
thing it's like a there was like a it
feels that and this is going to sound
ridiculous it feels feels like there was
a global
Treaty of which okay this is where we
are we can't the debt has got too big
and nobody can pay the interest payments
without destroying the global
economy so we're just going to have to
pretend we're not um debasing the
currency and call it quantitative easing
and say it's a precise way of injecting
money exactly into the right part of the
financial system and it's like no what
you're doing is getting a credit card
it's a perfect your credit card and then
giving it to your dad and say you you
worry about this it's not my
problem wow so I want to see if I'm if
I'm tracking this because not to get
back into Doom porn but this seems
pretty Doom porny uh okay so for people
because the world works it's not Doom
porn because it works every time they do
it or are we just pushing off a
problem okay so
it's making assets go up when they do it
it is meaning that companies don't
default the banking system remain
sound but are we actually able to get
out of out of debt so let me make sure
I'm understanding what you're saying
this is going to be very important okay
so the I know we're using round numbers
but this is very helpful so worldwide
GDP gross domestic product the the
amount of productivity so the C Capital
that is usable
effectively uh you have two different
people that have debt in that amount
which there's no one to to have real
money to pay the [__] thing
off so if you had one person that was
like okay we're maxed out we're at 2%
but GDP is 2% cool we have the path Just
Be Frugal and and you've got a path out
of this but when you have two people
that owe the whole amount
effectively you now go into money
Printing and I mean if this works I'm
actually okay with it I know how that's
going to get me lit up but it so the
solution here is okay we have two two
large groups governments private sector
which are all the groups that exist and
each one of them owes the entire
worldwide GDP in
debt you can't both be in that situation
there's no Peter there's no uh you can't
rob a Peter to pay Paul because they're
both in the same
situation so now the only thing left is
printing money devaluing everybody to
get out of this situation but the way in
which we do that by buying things from
uh the private sector is we're making
people that hold assets wealthier we're
increasing the gap between the rich and
the poor because because the way that we
inject money into the system only
reaches people that own assets and so
we've created this problem and the only
way out is to print money which is going
to increase the the the jinny
coefficient for people that know that
phrase where it's like nobody cares in
absolute dollars how much you have you
just hate that your neighbor Timmy has
more than you and so you freak the [__]
out and so it becomes the differential
that becomes the destabilizing element
so what you said assuming what I just
repeated is
correct that sounds
destabilizing and Doom porn so help what
is the other what is the other outcome
the other outcome is let it all
burn clearly a terrible
idea when you're this far in debt let it
all burn doesn't work anymore right
that's the end of that's kind of end of
civilization stuff Ultra Doom porn so
you're faced with Doom porn and Ultra
for Doom porn what are youing
God right there is no other way so this
is what people need to
understand what is
GDP GDP is a sum of all the economic
activity that goes on and it's comprised
GDP growth rates are comprised very
simply of the number of people in your
economy is it growing if it's growing
your economy grows because there's more
people generating more activity
generally secondly
is how much productivity does it have I
are those people productive do they make
a lot of stuff for each manh hour and
finally is how fast is debt growing so
when we have an aging
population the number of humans declines
over
time what happens is we stopped
immigration almost everywhere because
everyone was under pressure for income
because real wages haven't gone up so we
we we lowered the rate of immigration so
that lowers Trend rate of growth aging
population they're less productive and
they spend less so GDP keeps doing this
for decades on end baked in the cake
from from that they' become less
productive because they're older people
and a whole bunch of them aren't in the
labor force anymore okay so you're not
very productive you're getting old not
population growing so guess what Bingo
answer debt ding ding ding ding ding we
just took on debt
right it was rational until it's not
it's like it's rational to Super
leverage yourself in a house and house
prices go up and you look like a god
until you get it wrong and you lose
everything so it was rational to take
the debt and this is where we've got to
and then it was the government's got to
the same boat and everyone was just the
debt so now the debt is the debt debt
growth is actually not that high anymore
because we've hit the
ceiling so the only way to solve this
this goes back to our earlier
conversation is we cannot solve
population
growth and debt growth is peaked out so
we got the one thing in the middle
called productivity and that takes us
right back to Ai and the robots and
cryptocurrencies internet of things
green energy all of these things so if
you are governments look what Europe's
doing it's interesting and maybe I'm
just inventing a narrative but Europe
the us Japan they all know what they're
doing so they're printing money to cover
their bills um and Europe thinks well
Christ we need to get the bloody economy
going here because GDP growth is what
pays our bills and it's pretty sluggish
because everyone's old here and
everyone's in debt and the banking
system is a
mess let's do a double whammy which is
what the US did back in the
40s let's put as much stimulus as we can
from this fake money
and RAM it into the green energy
sector and we're going to build a lot of
stuff and we understand a lot of stuff
is going to be wasted Capital but out of
it we're going to do one amazing thing
and the it will happen is out of
this energy costs will
collapse now this is really important
for people to
understand what does technology do
technology drives more productivity out
of a single unit of
energy kind of once you see this thing
it's like that's what humans do with
everything is like find a way of getting
extracting more for that barrel of oil
because that's what we
use now that barrel of oil has been our
fixed energy source since we replaced
whale oil so we've been using this and
so it's been the constant so technolog
have to drive all the productivity in
every way it can based on how much is
this so we have to bring computational
power down everything down so that one
fixed thing which is the price of oil
which on a inflation adjusted basis been
pretty stable for the last 70 80
years and if what the US is doing with
its inflation Act and the Europeans are
doing with its green energy and Japan is
doing and China is doing and Australia
is doing and the UK is
doing if they force enough investment
in they will change the energy source of
the
world and because all of the have
exponential downtrends in cost we will
change the energy
coefficient and what happens is
productivity times the lowering of the
cost of energy is an exponential change
for all of us that's how you solve this
there's almost no other way of solving
this problem of slow GDP growth old
populations massive
debts without blowing up everything so
you're going to have to keep doing this
money printing thing which is miserable
because it makes some people rich and
other people
poor and or you can have inflation which
just makes everybody miserable they're
all terrible things but the faster you
can get to changing that productivity
equation the better because it's the
it's the only way there's no there's
simply no other way of solving
it you either Rob from everybody or grow
the
economy with a declining population um
so talk to me about the energy you're
saying that so maybe I have uh just an
undereducated view on the green energy
front
so you see the cost of energy coming
down as we invest more and more into the
green energy
side yes
so right now we're in transition where
we're not probably producing enough oil
and we don't have enough energy coming
out of solar winds geothermal nuclear
all of that so so you know we've got
this Market where Energy prices are high
because of supply issues and other stuff
but when you look at the
trend all of these are growing as a
percentage share of the energy grid
there still oil and coal are still
massive right but they're coming down
and Europe's really forcing it uh
decarbonization and so we're seeing a
rise of these others they start some of
them subsidize but the subsidies go over
time but the really interesting is none
of that is the fact that the cost per
unit of energy keeps coming down and
many of these are now cheaper than
natural gas which was very cheap so it's
like huh okay and we've only just
started where we are in this
exponentiality so my view
is in 20 years time the cost of energy
will be marginal for everybody and
everything much like the cost of water
is marginal for everybody um and the
cost of many things we take for grounds
are totally
marginal now I don't know if given your
um macro Outlook that this is a
reasonable question to ask you or not
but
um when when you look out at uh the rate
of adoption of green energy do you think
that we're because you just said like
maybe we're not producing enough oil and
gas do you think that we're moving too
rapidly in that direction or do you
think no no no you you make these huge
Investments you have to put regulation
in place force people to do it faster
because these have a a far more
Technology based exponential um okay so
this is the inverse of the GDP
problem do you manage its smooth decline
or do you blow
up here do you transition slowly with
the issues of climate change and the
issues of um cost of energy and all
these other things and the need for
productivity or do you blow up I do you
just take short-term pain to get to the
promised land
faster again it's probably a rational
economic decision to do that so maybe or
maybe not Energy prices rise I'm not
entirely sure will copper prices rise
probably will some prices rise probably
can that be offset by Ai and other
deflationary pressures probably you know
it's not baked in the cake people always
conflate some commodity going up in
price to see inflation's back and it's
all going to run rampant again it's very
rare that that happens we've just had it
now so it's going to be in everybody's
head as the boogie monster but they're
looking they're usually looking at the
wrong boogie monster
so
so it's going to be a balancing act um
maybe they get it right maybe they get
it wrong but I think they're all pretty
most of these governments are pretty
sure that they want to do it as fast as
they
can and so does that mean that they
would
if by their actions they cause high
energy prices for five
years would they give out stimulus
handouts to
people probably is that not the best way
to say listen if you are getting hurt by
this and guess what that's exactly what
Europe's just done last year it was
giving handouts to people to say look we
understand your electricity bill is high
and it's hard for you so we'll we'll
help you um now did that drive inflation
to some
extent Maybe but maybe not I mean it was
just going for the electricity bill you
didn't give people extra money in their
pocket so it's complicated as everything
is but I don't know I'm kind of in a I'm
a fan of if you're going to go for
positive change do it as fast as
possible if you're going to go to
negative change and you can glide path
take the Glide
path very interesting so um and I'm not
a fan I'm not a fan of conative easing
or any of that stuff I'm just like this
evil this
evil which one do you want to choose
yeah it is a very interesting question
so when you were talking I was in in
full acknowledgement of the human mind
goes to the
problems
um in the context we're in now and I I
am not a geopolitical thinker and so I
want to be very clear about that I want
people to understand that I am I am
seeking to uh increase the island of my
knowledge
um when I when I look at as somebody who
has
studied from uh how do evil people get
control perspective studied what Hitler
did in World War II he was very much
like not seeing the increase in
productivity path out of things and so
he's like well for Germany to get out
from under this terrible weight we have
to start land grabbing and when I see
Russia that is the population part of
the
equation right when you're taking over
countries what you're actually doing is
getting the people in resources so
you're solving for your own population
productivity more resources but you're
actually getting the people part of the
GDP equation that's interesting so um
how do you
contextualize Russia and the Ukraine in
this moment where you've got the private
sector the governments are completely
indebted you're at a position where
birth rate are declining certainly in
the Western World very rapidly if
demographics are Destiny and we are just
in a a [__] show
demographically does that when you were
talking I started looking at the Russia
Ukraine thing in a totally different
light and I'm very much somebody on the
outside of that I'm not close to it at
all uh but I'm very curious if that sort
of recontextualization of oh this is
somebody who's like well I know how to
solve this problem quite rapidly uh or
am I looking at it wrong
um I don't like
geopolitics
because so much of it is stuff that we
don't know so there's so much
conjecture about almost everything in
geopolitics apart from the fact that
Russian troops are in Ukraine and
they're fighting each
other who motivations of what for what
and how I don't even know but what thing
it did do
to go back to what we were talking about
it accelerated Europe everyone thought
well the Europeans going to back away
from their green energy policy now
aren't they the Europeans went no [__]
you we're now super motivated to get
this done as fast as possible because we
do not want to be beholden to Russia or
the United States or anybody else for
that matter energy Independence is an
incredible thing right it's one of the
powers that superpowers that the United
States has has energy
Independence all other energy on Earth
could go and the US has oil and gas and
more of it than pretty much anybody else
in the world
so I so it also if you think about the
history of war and how much has been
fought over the Middle East not because
we want some sand or the few
people it's because we want the energy
and we want to control it because the
energy is the thing can't remember what
it was called in in um
in Dune but whatever the thing is Right
humans want to control the thing whether
it was whale oil or this or whatever the
thing spice right in spice that's right
spice so that's what that's what the US
controls and the Russia controls a bunch
of it and we want to change that
equation and the Europeans are in the
Middle with with not enough of it and
it's in everybody's interest for
everybody to walk away from this one
commodity ruling the world
because it's not the commodity we care
about it's the energy we care
about well said talk to me about China
um seemed for a while like things were
getting pretty dicey you had people if
it can be believed people protesting
like crazy uh governments making funds
unavailable to people um I saw that
happen in Cypress up close given that
Lisa's family is from Cyprus um
what what's the status of things
uh a China's economy was slowing down
and they locked themselves into a really
brutal lockdown for the pandemic and
even the Chinese people who are quite
compliant you know Asian populations
tend to be more Society compliant than
us who kind of like saying [__] you to
everybody if it doesn't suit their
interest so know Europeans are quite
Society minded as well generally
speaking um
so the Chinese ask too much of their
people for whatever reason I don't know
whether it was actually for a real
reason in the end or whether it's for
autocratic reasons or whatever anyway
economic growth falls off a cliff uh
people are angry growth is weakening
property markets a mess that's where
that's one of the big wealth gates for
everybody in China That's where people
make money um people in the streets and
people angry the Chinese have kind of
interesting enough
stimulating and then you know they
locked up all these entrepreneurs and
threw them in prison or threw them down
a well um they're now like well we've
decided we need to be growing up five
and a half percent a year and we want
entrepreneurs back in you know and
they've reopened Hong Kong for
cryptocurrency so it feels like whatever
they were
doing they've got what they wanted
whether it was because she wanted to get
control again the Game of Thrones is not
a game that I I like to get involved in
and because everybody speculates we
don't know all I know Chinese are
stimulating they want the economy to
grow and um they seem to want to be an
entrepreneur I don't know why you choose
to be an entrepreneur in China because
you know the next cycle around you get
shot and replaced by the next one but
somebody's going to do
it interesting I I didn't know that they
had reopened back up sorry go ahead yeah
so again think about mentality we're at
the bottom this is the worst markets
forward looking I Chinese stock markets
up like 50%
already and their driving parts of the
global cycle so when you read it in the
news headlines it's usually too
late did you hear the recent speech I
think it was in uh the European
Parliament oh God uh I don't know
exactly where it was the speech was in
English though and uh they were saying
basically uh that we want to
degrowth and they made it sound like
this is going to be amazing greatest
thing ever degrowth uh less people on
the planet just all good all good
um you're saying that's a bad assumption
so no the bad assumption is that it
creates wage
inflation the
degrowth okay
degrowth at
first
creates
more for less
people okay great and if you can
distribute that great
the issue
is at the end of
it you end up with the robots and the
AI because you are hyper incentivized to
keep increasing
productivity that you are sewing the
seeds of our own
demise because of the economic engine is
actually forcing you to to take this
incentive it's kind of weird but that's
where it's
going well
okay the answer to this slow growth and
this shrinking population is more
productivity the way of creating
productivity is robots AI
Etc the faster they grow the more that
we use them the more that we need them
because the population's smaller this is
why Elon must keep saying people don't
understand this he keeps saying
shrinking population is bad it's not bad
for economic growth going down it's bad
because it incentivizes everybody to
increase the workforce so the the H um
the the population side of the equation
can be offset by the machines so look at
an Amazon warehouse perfect example
Amazon has gone from having one and a
half million people about a million
people working there and zero robots to
a million people and 500,000 robots the
robots work 247 365 they're more
productive than humans in all aspects
and they just keep replacing humans
sorry didn't you say that there still a
million humans working though so it's
just increased productivity through
robots so are you saying that that
should be to match their scale it should
be 1.5 million people
correct so they're replacing the jobs
that would have naturally been coming
from
humans and this trend will accelerate
until there is no need for humans
because the machines will have taken
over this is Elon mus thing is the more
we try and make these machines more
intelligent the robot's better elon's
building this damn thing himself right
Twitter is the training model for the AI
that he's built and he's got Dojo one of
the largest supercomputers at a at a
focus task that's ever existed it is the
largest and then he's got the Optimus
robot I there's the end of humanity
right there because once the genie is
out of a
bottle so that's why he's worried and
that's why you know you need to pull the
rip cord and piss off to Mars
it's not from anything else it's The
Logical conclusion of economic forces
creating more more powerful
intelligence that doesn't require
humans okay now that's Singularity gets
to now I feel seen by you because this
is where I'm at um so then take us back
to your early statement that you're
optimistic about the exponential age
whereas what you just said is how I feel
about the exponential age when I don't
forcibly put my optimistic hat on
because look I I ultimately I default to
optimism I think it's a wiser place to
be I certainly think it's a more
enjoyable place to be um
and I think that people should find that
path where they can explain things in a
way that end well and I thank you for
letting me wear my more pessimistic hat
because I knew you were going to be in
the more optimistic seat here um but
why when you look at exponential age if
you can see the the economic forces will
incentivize that path whereas population
and demographics or destiny they're in
plain side everybody can see it it is
going to decline massively at least
temporarily that that is for sure and so
as the population begins to decline
dramatically as we then the economic
forces push us to lean more into Ai and
Robotics and the guy closest to the
problem is like hey PS let's get to Mars
um where where do you like what's the
thing that has to go right or where do
you think that either Elon or myself are
looking at this wrong so you're
confusing time Horizons a lot of people
do this a lot of people go the Dollar's
going to collapse because it's so much
in
debt probably right is it GNA happen
this year next year or in 20 years
time you can't worry about something
that is 20 out because the future paths
are yet unknown right because we're too
far out the Event Horizon is too far out
to get high probability forecasting so
we have to make a huge bunch of
assumptions so let's go to the shorter
time Horizon
is
is are we liked to
benefit from the ability to superpower
human knowledge probably are we going to
benefit from cheapening energy cost
probably are we going to benefit from
the things like self-driving cars
driving us to work delivering packages
drones all of the stuff are we going to
benefit from the space Technologies and
starlink are we going to benefit yes yes
yes is the stock market going to go up
if we invest in this stuff yes okay so
there's a lot of benefits that are being
laid out for us all is longevity of life
going to increase
yes are we going to have massive
breakthroughs in in genetic Sciences yes
can we train AI models on cancer and all
of this stuff yes right okay that to me
sounds like a golden age I call it the
Renaissance or I'm English I call it the
Renaissance um but that
is but after that you get to what people
refer to as the
singularity is where it becomes
unforecastable and this is what the
debate is going on amongst Sam
mman emad mosac with um Elon Noah Harari
everybody right it's that moment it's
like what the hell does that look like
elon's like I don't know so let's just
have a plan B makes sense none of us
really want to go to Mars but I get it
right if we completely screw this up but
I don't see how the the virus of
Technology isn't like in 2001 A Space
Odyssey just doesn't go with the ship
you know so I'm not sure yeah that's my
I don't know that are we able as humans
because we're so such an Adaptive
cockroach of a species well we haven't
proven to be yet we're still pretty
young on the planet versus others let's
assume we're like crocodiles and sharks
and we can hang around for a few million
years will we figure out an Adaptive
mechanism to deal with
this maybe that's the that's the
Optimist outcome is like I know humans
we're humans we're we're amazing we
figure this out and the other one is
we're never going to be smart as these
machines we're so totally [__] I don't
know but I know that in my
lifetime there's a 20 or 30y year period
which might be a truly extraordinary Mo
moment in
history and like and the issue is is we
can't see through the other side of it
and that's terrifying but you know it's
you know we I think we mentioned this
last time we chatted I don't have kids
so I have to worry about iter
less people who do I I get it I get it
it is an
existential threat of which we cannot
figure out how to stop it and regulation
is it's not going to stop
it because the technology is out of the
bottle it's like you can't stamp crypto
out because the technology is out of the
bottle now and it's
everywhere and yes open AI is the
current leader with Microsoft but all of
the big us companies are incentivized to
out compete each other and so they're
incentivized to create more and more
powerful models but if they get
regulated well somebody else will do
it this is the geers you're talking
about
geysers is they're popping up everywhere
but really what is happening is it's a
massive bloody
explosion that is
Unstoppable so talk to me talk to me
about regulatory so as somebody who
doesn't live in the US but you pay
attention to the US uh you probably have
a much clearer picture than somebody
like me who's not only in the US but I'm
in
California uh how do you think this is
all going to settle out is the US going
to get left behind are we being too
strict
regulatorily um how does this play
out I mean this is an impossible choice
right how do you regulate this thing and
how do you get a bunch of 75y old
politicians to regulate this thing I
don't know I don't think anybody knows
oh we can align the models with Humanity
what does that even mean nobody even
knows how to do that for God's sake we
don't even understand how large language
models learn we don't even know what
they know all we know is hey we're
figuring out different questions to ask
it and it seems to be able to answer
them but when you listen to Sam Alman
he's
like well have we
created um you know
AGI I don't know he said I don't think
so and elon's like well it's three to
five years away it's Unstoppable because
of the profit
motive well also what you talking about
earlier with the need for increased
productivity but if you were to so map
this on to the way that different
geographies are responding to bitcoin
and crypto which feel very similar to me
uh in terms of either you're embracing
the new where things are going you're
willing to face that the way that we're
handling the financial system creates
these incentives and so you're either
trying to Capital control lock people in
not them let them leave the country or
certainly not let the capital leave the
country or you're like hey you're using
it as a way to get people to come to you
this is a really important Point Tom why
why do they want to stop you leaving
because they want to mutualize the
losses on
you if you leave to the other
place they're not mutualize the losses
on
you because your crypto it's you know
that's why the capital controls it's
like don't leave our old system it's
like exactly what's happening with the
regional Banks please don't take your
deposits out because they all go
bust our participation in the F currency
system is our deposit and if we go
you're just left with leverage because
it's the collateral of the system this
is why they don't want it to
happen and do you see how do you see the
US do you think that we're we're being
cuz it feels very antagonistic to crypto
at the federal level you're getting some
stuff happening at the state level which
is interesting so this is really
important so firstly just on the AI
versus crypto very oppressive on
crypto the biggest AI companies in the
world the US so they're probably going
to be a bit sof a touch around that and
these guys are playing the usual trick
of we'll be good guys you don't need to
regulate us we'll kind of do the right
thing right because there's too much
money available in this equation so
crypto us because you know the US Pro
uh US citizens actually have a lot of
capital restrictions the land of the
free is actually pretty
unfree people don't want to deal with US
citizens in Banks so if you come to the
Cayman Islands or the UK or Spain and
you're a US citizen you want to open a
bank account nobody wants to open your
bank account really it's pain because of
the US reporting and the US tentacles
State tentacles its grip on the Global
Financial system it owns Swift payments
it owns everything and it wants every US
citizen to pay its taxes because the the
mother beast needs to feed the debt
burden right so it's actually very
restrictive so it doesn't like you being
able to opt out the financial system
okay they want to make sure they get the
taxes it's fine you're a US
citizen but different countries have
been more loose on it I think Europe is
going to freak out over AI more than it
the US is but Europe's been actually
better on crypto than the US
has why I don't know but the crypto side
of the equation is really important
because I've lived this my entire
life why is London such a big Financial
Center considering it's a tiny little
island in the middle of a really Brown
muddy cold sea it's
because it speaks English
and it has a well-developed financial
system and legal rule of
law but what really changed for
London was the US coming off the gold
standard um back in 19712 whatever it
was so that created something called the
Foreign Exchange Market because before
everything was pegged to
gold and now the pound and the dollar
and the deuts mark and the Yen were all
moving around independently
and the US had Capital controls because
it's got the global Reserve currency
it's like please don't mess around you
know we've just gone off and changed the
global system we need to be careful okay
I get it fine so the UK said well all
these people we trade with they need to
get access to different currencies
now so the Foreign Exchange Market
started largest market the world had
ever
seen then the US made another false step
so the banks started moving to London
right big lucrative massive
Market deepened the UK's trade linkages
with everybody Financial trade linkages
next thing happens is now everybody's
trading around with currencies the
dollar is the middle currency the
reserve
currency and people want to borrow
dollars and the US is being restricted
with its capital so the UK says forget
it we'll do it it became what's known as
the euro dollar market which is the
overseas market for dollar borrowing and
lending that becomes a we don't know the
size of it but let's call it a $400
trillion dollar market whoa and then the
us then we get this big breakthrough
in derivatives the US has got the
Chicago Board of Trade doing Futures and
options and all this
stuff
but we start to figure out more
complicated structures things like swap
and the US stops its banks doing it by
its use of regulatory Capital they're
like no no no this is inefficient you
can't do this the UK and Europe went
well we're going to regulate and allow
it to happen because it's big we've seen
this before that becomes a quadrillion
dollar market Jesus that's why every
single Bank from about
1985 well particularly after the big
bang in London so let's call it from
about 1990 to about
2010 all the major Banks largest
operations were London so golden sack's
biggest operation most profitable London
maril Lynch London maril Lynch is
different because it was a brokerage
firm but JP Morgan they're all
London so London if you've been watching
the
news is going to do the same thing it's
called regulatory
Arbitrage London is putting together a
very sensible set of crypto
rules as has Europe as has Switzerland
as has Singapore as has Hong Kong as as
Australia okay there's its old Trading
Group that it did with Euro dollars and
it did with derivatives and it did with
foreign exchange all got their
regulations in place the UK is the Hub
at the middle and it will capture the
line share and before you know coinbase
G and everybody will move to London
there still be listed firms in the US
but they will move and this is the issue
with the AI and crypto you can't shut it
down because if it is productive and it
has value and it has future expected
value that's higher than
today it will go
somewhere and if we look at the crypto
market now it's a trillion dollars okay
that's meaningful for the UK
economy where is it going to go well 10
30 50 trillion well the UK wants that
pie because it shot itself in the foot
after brexit um so the US can try and
regulate it all it wants it'll just move
it's like water decentralized networks
and Global F finance and money is like
water it flows everywhere and it's the
same with this AI which is why I don't
think we can solve it with
regulation because somebody's
the yeah it it will go somewhere that is
for sure walk me through the reversal
the Chinese reversal on
uh Bitcoin so they had clamped down
everywhere including Hong Kong but
they've now opened up Hong Kong that was
startling to me well they've done
this they've done this several times
before is at the wrong time they try and
stop Capital
flight because everybody knows that the
China has been using this to get money
out of the China economy which is what
stable coins are being used for as well
as has the global Art Market as has
there's a lot of things that the Chinese
use to get money in and out of the
system so they try to stop that when the
US dollar is very strong that's a start
because they can't lose control of their
currency it's a big fear of the
Chinese Additionally the Chinese have
moved towards a central bank digital
currency which is very useful for them
because once you you do it you can now
take
stock of the number of youan in your
system because there's no cash there
still is but you know what you're doing
is you can then see where it
goes um and so I think they did that
they got the size and scope of what
their money supply really
is and now you can reopen it because you
can now track it because it's all
digital well you couldn't track it
easily before because you could hide it
with bank payments blah blah blah but
blockchain makes everything
transparent much to you know everybody's
shag GM because everyone thought it was
a privacy it's actually not not in that
kind of mechanism and I also think this
is more contentious is that's the reason
binance survived everything is the
Chinese government wanted it
to
because that is the linkage between the
F world and the crypto world and they
own the CH you know Chinese State
essentially is a supporter of the
largest crypto Exchange in the world
because that is a potential bet on the
future of the system of money and it
wants a say in that and makes tot
where's where's binance headquartered
there isn't
one where does oh God what's his name CZ
Dubai okay yeah I was gonna say I can't
fathom that he's actually in China uh
very interesting so when you think about
um sorry and the US will probably
support coinbase in the end what because
everybody needs control of this
situation if not the UK will take
control of the entire money the global
world of new money or theem I hope
you're right about that but I don't see
a single move on behalf of the US
government that would lead me to believe
that uh unless they lose the coinbase
lawsuit I I think they're just gonna we
have a change of government yeah true
true what do you think about
2024 I don't know we haven't yet seen
the contenders you know everybody's got
a bit too much hair on them still so we
don't doesn't feel like there's
something obvious but maybe there will
be maybe something out of this you know
I thought Frank Suarez not because he's
a um Francis Suarez not because you know
he's the pro crypto guy but he's Young's
May of Miami right he's the mayor of
Miami he
is Centrist
essentially you
know just that kind of person younger
more D we need to find somebody of that
we can't the US can't keep going down
the same thing of baby boomers voting
for Baby Boomers voting for Baby Boomers
and trying to protect themselves that
has to be broken somehow has to it
broken the UK look rishy sunak he's
young he's a Centrist young whether they
keep him in or not I I don't I I don't
vote in the UK anymore but at least
they're making progress like crypto
regulation and Ai and technology and
fintech and because they got a young
young government and we've seen that in
you know France has done well because
macron is
younger um you know so we need
that yeah that I will agree with so
since I'm wearing my uh my Doomer hat
today I'll push on the geographical
thing so what it feels like here in the
US is that things are really beginning
to intentionally divide along
geographical regions and uh you're
getting like this hunkering down into
blue State Red State
uh people peeling off if you're into
crypto you're either going to Texas or
you're going to Miami um and seeing the
there's this whole new idea of uh make
America States again where people are
saying hey we need to stop doing all of
the regulation at the federal level we
need to start pushing this down to the
state level um and letting the states
compete for The Residency effectively of
the populace and let them begin to move
now I'm grateful as somebody that feels
out of step with the federal government
on my take on crypto I'm certainly very
excited that that is at least an option
but like your boy um gold smith gold
weight James James gold smith there we
go uh I am I would like to to broadcast
my dire warning while there might be a a
part of that that is good that ends so
badly because you end up fracturing you
end up pitting people against each other
it ends up I think becoming very
problematic very fast I saw this in
2012 um because of what happened in
Europe and I saw what was happening in
the US it's one of the reasons I bought
a and built a house in the Cayman
Islands I just thought I need a plan B
and the plan B needs to be somewhere
where nobody cares
about but I can still live a high
quality of life it was a very purposeful
decision knowing where the world was
going to go because there was no
solution so the kind of realizations
that you're having now I had it's more
visceral for you now because you're just
seeing another banking crisis but we saw
it in 2012 we saw really bad outcomes
there and I think the US one is still to
grow so it's just it's just the the
delayed response of H having it happen
to you the moment it does it's like okay
get it now so I did this and I don't
think that's going to go away I'm hoping
for a miracle what doesn't go away sorry
populism
anger uh Division and a separation into
smaller States I actually spoke to um an
old client of mine old friend who was
one of the world's great macro thinkers
this Italian counts and he speaks very
quietly I was telling him about this I
was like I think Spain is going to
Splinter into countries the UK is
probably going to Splinter Scotland will
probably separate you know blah blah
blah and he said
said listen R the trend of the last 50
years was super States the EU the United
States of America he said usually those
things end up separating again and if
you think he said you know he was a
whatever he was a count from a Italian
you know one of the Venetian States
these little small states he said the
world does this es and flows
centralization decentralization right
it's very common he said it's not
necessarily a bad thing it's the getting
there that could be Troublesome depends
how it how it happens you know defet we
disbanded the British
Empire you can reboot your life your
health even your career anything you
want all you need is discipline I can
teach you the tactics that I learned
while growing a billion doll business
that will allow you to see your goals
through but you want better health
stronger relationships a more successful
career any of that is possible with the
mindset and business programs in Impact
Theory University join the thousands of
students who have already accomplished
amazing things tap now for a free trial
and get started
today that was
gigantic and yes but there was some
pretty ugly stuff that happened like you
know the uh what happened in India when
we kind of gave back the keys and
everybody killed each other in the
partitioning it's ugly but it did happen
over time so I don't know I think the
trend is not going to go away unless we
somehow change this economic equation
because that's what's driving
it yeah it's the same equation that's
driving
it yeah very very distressing and I
think unfortunately I think the pieces
are already on the table in terms of how
we could potentially change the economic
system uh which is effectively Bitcoin
you have to remove the ability to
inflate once you take that away though
there are also consequences on the other
side and so uh it is a very um man it's
a very which is my my my argument has
been you can't do this at once anybody
who does this wants the end of the
world it has to happen as a Glide path
and over time the crypto side of the
equation the new rails for the
system can experiment get itself sorted
out figured out and then we can go so my
I spoke to the to the Department of
Defense about this in
2014 13
13 and I said you know they periodically
you know reach out to PE people like me
you know thinkers about stuff who who
are looking at crisis and stuff like
that because their job is to to assess
risk and I was talking to them about it
and I said obviously he said you know
we're worried about debt we're worried
about the system blowing up I said yes
obviously everybody is um because that's
one one of the things they need to game
out what happens
if the West loses control of money and
debt and everything
else and I said well I think the answer
is there and I think it's Bitcoin he
said yeah tell me more I said and I
think the US government and the UK
government invented it which is the NSA
and the gchq in the UK who are the two
World centers of cryptography because
even how the white paper's written it's
transan
yes always have and I asked the
Department of Defense they said yeah
we've considered that
too they
seal or it was just people from that
that went rogue I don't think it's
necessarily A rogeness I think like
Google have like Google X where they do
tons of experiments right they know that
one of the esoteric risks for the entire
Western system is the issue of
money so there's probably groups of
people who have given things to try and
if you concede a new system maybe they
tried a hundred of these and just one
succeeded we don't
know but it would make sense because
that's what they do this kind of
stuff so one of these took
off and so I think it's always been I
don't think it's a coincidence that came
out of the financial crisis I don't
think it's a coincidence that that the
Haring cycle and all of this is all
related it is the solution always always
has been the solution you just can't go
there tomorrow so all you need to do is
let it happen slowly and manage that
transition you'll be okay there'll be
times where it speeds up because we've
got something bad going on and there's
times when it slows down but if you and
that's what I think the US government
regulation is trying to do they don't
want to bank crypto just slow this down
because if all the deposits leave the
banking system it's game
over if they don't set up a way of
collecting taxes because everybody's
living in cryptand and they have to ask
your honesty in what trades you've
done that's not going to work for them
because they can't pay the
bills
so I think it's they're trying to catch
up um I think that the UK will have a
cbdc I think the Europeans will it's all
coming relatively soon relatively soon
next five years three years four years
years and they'll feel more in control
of the system that they've got because
they need to pay the interest payments
because if not and the a the benefits
the Aging benefits you know all of this
social security is a problem with such
an old population people have talked
about Universal basic income I the
government paying you because you've got
no job but the economy makes a lot of
money because all the machines are doing
it and I just think what humans do
really well is
socialize and you and I big Believers in
community and because of crypto we can
share the benefits of being in a
network so maybe that's the role of
humans that we can find new ways of
working within communities to encourage
communities philosophies like-minded
interest where you participate in them
um because it's certainly not going to
be doing anything that AI can do in 15
years time it was
pointless it's really interesting man I
mean we don't need come to make video I
mean I was just had this today when I
saw that model one and it's been in my
head but it's like us making
video literally within two years it's
almost pointless but within 15 years it
won't exist you'll just put a prompt in
saying hey can you get me to talk to R
about um AI um let's let's let's do it
for about an hour and a half long
whatever it is off you go and it does it
I've seen it because it's already
happening so you and I don't need to
have a conversation because our AI
personas can have that
conversation is that what you predict
because I don't think that's what'll
actually
happen I'm seeing it
already I'm seeing it here here is I
think we have to ask the fundamental
question why did AI come into existence
in the first place because I think that
this is going to give us the most uh
direct understanding of the human
conditions so that we can predict where
this goes this is why originally I
really wanted you to be the solution it
won't be so I I am the Ubi experiment
personified so I made a ton of money um
never need to work again and yet work
harder than I've ever worked in my life
and people that win the lottery end up
imploding emotionally Rich Kids implode
emotionally there there's a reason for
this and I would say it's a very
predictable reason that tells us a lot
about our future as it relates to AI so
there is going to be and there already
is it's utterly fascinating uh there is
going to be
digital influencers that are they're not
real people um they're you know an
avatar that you create and you feed it
you know give me uh Ral Paul meets Joe
Rogan and you go off and that becomes a
personality and it does a thing but the
reason that AI exists is because nature
had to make us face a saber-tooth tiger
to do that it had to give us drives
hunger uh the drive for sex all of that
and so it has Evolution has Ed deeply in
the human psyche a need for progress and
a need for meaning and purpose a need
for what you're calling socialization
that the connection with other
people and unless we merge with machines
which we will but it's going to be down
the road that's I don't see that coming
barring uh massive acceleration of uh
technological advances aimed at the the
uh Hardware wet work interface of the
human mind which may happen in the next
15 years I would be a little
surprised playing that clip might not
age well uh but setting that aside for a
second so we have these biological
impulses they are incredibly strong
drivers that Force us to seek progress
and contribution to the group so as far
as I can tell one of two things is going
to happen either the thing that really
becomes popular is something I can feel
as of ownership too so I'll I'll be
blatant there is a reason that I created
an avatar engine because I'm getting
older and there will come a day unless
somebody figures out anti-aging where
it's just not cool for me to be the guy
on camera so hey if I can create a
visual Persona that then allows me to be
untethered to my physical body which
admittedly it's beyond the scope of this
interiew interview to get into that but
I think there are actually things that
have to be thought through very well
there I will Point people to Jordan
Peterson and his fears around
virtualization but anyway if I can
create a Persona that allows me still to
flex my intellectual muscle in a way
that creates value in other people's
lives so I feel like I'm still
contributing to the group but I'm able
to do it in a far more ageless way but I
need that sense of I have not wasted my
time on planet Earth and if people don't
[__] hear me when I say you better
figure out away for humans to feel that
they have contributed meaningfully and
that is my my huge fear giving them
money is not going to solve that problem
Ubi will not solve the problem of
meaning and so people have to figure out
how does meaning exists in a world with
AI and you've got to realize here the
other important point is the AI doesn't
care how you think doesn't give a [__]
about your emotions but we have to be
thoughtful about that it doesn't care
about your job it doesn't care about
anything it's going to it it so think
about it this way AI because I know
where you're going AI by default doesn't
care about anything but AI will do
nothing unless you tell it to so go get
good at go go win a video game go
whatever in the end you see the issue is
is where this goes is the AI has exactly
the same state that you just described
from cumans survival
why you would have to program it to care
about survival no no no no it doesn't
program we're not talking about a
computer program that reads this thing
and does that it's not a formula this is
intelligence You're Building here so
intelligence makes and builds on its own
decision making processes in ways that
you cannot control agreed but so here's
where I think people are getting this
wrong people are forgetting humans have
been programmed and so people think oh
this intelligence thing is devoid of
context false if I [__] with your
microbiome I will mess with your ability
not not even ability I will change the
way that you process inputs so humans
are so deeply contextual that I think
people are delusional about what they
think intelligence is so my thing is
intelligence is inert unless you give it
an impulse and so this is the fourth
thing so if number one is ignore number
two
is uh try to abolish and number three is
panic and four is be thoughtful the
thing that we have to be thoughtful
about what are you going to what context
are you going to create that creates
that initial impulse of uh context and
drive for AI to do something so Mo Gat
talks about this his book so the two
books I urge people to read them because
look there's a big debate about this
stuff almost everybody ends up in the
same place which is kind
Terror it's kind of like yeah probably
we get replaced by different species now
whether we're basically
fatalism yes but whether we're part of
that species or not is a different
question right are we augmented or we
not so that's what homo stus talks about
and in great intellectual depth is
augmented augmented humans or ex um
extermination of humans or replacement
of humans by by another thing moat says
I mean you could palpably sense his fear
cuz he saw it firsthand and he just said
listen it's all well and good
now we all kind of understand how fast
this is moving and what this could mean
he's like yeah and we've also got we
working on Google is quantum Computing
when you put these two together you know
this is changed go so you have one you
have one thing the only thing he thinks
you can do to make this outcome that
you're talking
about is be
nice it's kind of this bizarre to AI or
to each
other how we interact with AI and
ourselves that's what the AI learns
from so we're the
parents of a kid that we don't know how
the kid is going to grow up so you can
Scream and Shout in the household you
can beat each other
up you can do all of these things you
can [__] talk about all these people and
it's going to affect your
child whoa and so that was his point and
that was it
feels both naive but also hopeful that
there's a
possibility and the answer is how I've
approached this is look we're not going
to know we can't know we can sit here
all day and talk about it and there's
thousands of pages of books and every
sci-fi movie ever made is on this topic
so here we are at the Cambrian
moment let's just [__] enjoy it this
is one of the most amazing things we
will ever live
through and it's such an incredible
change in how the world is around us and
we're all pissed off of the world around
us so here's something that's different
it's like crypto here's a new system
here's another system you know how do we
how do we deal with the issues of
society well we've got building blocks
and they're interesting like our cars
will soon Drive ourselves and our Amazon
delivery trucks will just come without
people and they'll be running on
electricity and that electricity will
have been generated by some super cheap
power supply and a robot will have come
and made your coffee and you
know just enjoy what's about to happen
and embrace it so if you can afford to
invest in it if not be
curious because as you said the first
three points there's nothing you can
do so so you kind of go for the other
human survival Instinct which is adapt
or die which you say let's do it and you
say well you know humans we don't we're
not going to merge with the machines or
whatever as I mentioned you before we've
all done it already You' got we will
merge with the machines I'm saying
timeline you've got your earphones in
you've got your Apple watch on you've
got your thing you've got your glucose
mon these are you merging with the
machines what are you doing you're using
the machine to augment your hearing
experience your health experience
everything everything around you is you
using your machines to augment
yourself and that is just going to
accelerate because what is a pacemaker
but a foreign digital body implanted to
give electric charges into my heart okay
if you told somebody that hundred years
ago they think you're scientific a
science fiction nutcase but pacemakers
have been going for what 40 50 years now
so the implants the you know people
getting new knees I mean that's now like
a quick operation in and out to have a
new
knee and soon the knee will have
Electronics in so it will happen without
us even knowing and you'll be doing a
podcast in two years time saying how
you've had this new chip imp plant
that's taking your blood glucose sugar
measurements and beaming it straight to
your phone and then It prepares your
meal exactly right and you won have even
thought about it but you and the Mach
emerging because do you know sorry go
ahead because to your point earlier our
job is to survive and the single best
answer for our
survival is trying
to get with a stronger
teammate it's it's the only way it's
like you know you always want to choose
the best guy on your team well if we can
merge with them if they're part of our
gang we're
okay you you're very high in trait
openness guaranteed uh as am I it's
interesting though so I I think that the
only uh part of the solution to dealing
with the current moment is fatalism that
what will be will be and not that
everything happens for a reason or
anything like that just that this is out
of our control and I I think from the
the dawn of time there was no way to
stop the cre of artificial intelligence
because technology is the promise of a
better future we have a an insatiable a
literally insatiable desire for Progress
uh we are going to inevitably create AI
I think on any timeline and on this
timeline it has already happened um but
I want to go back to what um you were
saying in terms of you're raising a kid
and that kid is
AI that's very very interesting to me in
terms of how we think about it I think
that that's hugely important and was a
blind spot that I had or was a a
metaphor that I didn't have in my
Arsenal and that's going to be very very
helpful I don't in in the same way that
AI is inevitable it is impossible for
you to get the world to agree and be
fine and that's just a fantasy it's I
don't see how that ever plays out unless
AI becomes so uh domineering that
somehow forces us to but even that is a
dystopia unto itself so anyway I don't
think that's going to happen but the
part that I think people are under
appreciating is that
you people are
anthropomorphizing Ai and I think that's
a mistake and I think that will cause
them to be very surprised by how AI
moves and I think closes a door to a
potential way to do this well so what I
mean by that is a AI does not care if it
lives or dies and so the moment people
say oh well AI wants to survive that's
an
anthropomorphic uh you're you're
thinking it thinks like a human and it
doesn't it is computer code that has not
yet been shaped by an evolutionary like
force we are that evolutionary type
force and right now if you're correct we
are just sort of blindly saying learn
how we are and I'm sure everybody's
heard the story of the AI that turned
Nazi in like three days on the internet
uh which is very troubling uh and so I
would say that just telling it Go learn
how we are and regurgitate us back to us
would be the wrong incentive structure
and there there are many bright Minds
talking about alignment but I think
alignment is the conversation and yes it
is it is a very thorny problem and for
people that haven't heard that phrase
before you need to align ai's um desires
quote unquote with ours so that AI has
the same goals that we have and if you
know azimov he wrote the three laws of
robotics which I don't have memorized
but basically the punchline was don't
hurt humans and so every robot was
programmed with an inability to hurt
humans and so it was like help a human
whenever you can and never hurt them I
forget what the other one was so we need
something akin to that with AI so that
AI wants to be beneficial to humanity
now whether that goes back to the
initial problem of once it proliferates
somebody's going to create AI That's
evil um possibly but I I don't think in
the same way that I don't think the the
overwhelming level of intelligence that
a AI will represent gives anybody the
excuse to tune out I don't think that
the fact that someone will inevitably
turn it into um a very brutal weapon is
an excuse not to try to create aligned
incentives with AI and so I think that
in terms of the the hopeful part I think
people need to recognize that AI doesn't
intrinsically intelligence doesn't
intrinsically want to consume and take
over and be in charge that is a human
result of evolution needing you to
survive a ruthless environment that was
truly read in tooth and Claw AI not in
that same boat and does not need to be
in that same boat and I agree I'm not so
sure about the amorphizing it because
you know we at core are some sort of
program code of whatever it is whether
there's more to that or not you know
science is still arguing this
stuff but we've had computer viruses and
their job is not to die it's not that
difficult so I don't know about that
um there's a lot of unended consequences
that I hadn't realized because we're all
having this debate right is it going to
take over humans or not and I spoke to
somebody Google X and they're
like what we're worried about I'm like
yeah tell me is like we're worried about
how AI can be used for genetic
modification and how fast this is going
to move he like we're not worried about
that stuff because everybody's worried
about that stuff but it is advancing so
fast in human genome analysis and
tinkering of
genomes that he said we're worried that
you could just choose I want to kill all
brown eyed people on Earth and create a
virus that does
it he said that is the problem with
AI is there are things that the
computational power is so fast and so
big that it can do a lot of things for
science which is amazing for humans you
know we will we will use AI to probably
cure most forms of cancer or figure out
you
know part of the the secret code to life
longevity Health all of these things
amazing but we will also use it to
destroy ourselves because we're humans
that's what they're worried about
because it's so prolific that it's
actually not that difficult there was a
very funny and the who whatever
brilliant Twitter user this was my
apologies for not attention I didn't
know it was going to stick with me as
much but somebody put in the comments
regarding our just inability to stop
developing AI they said great filter go
Burr and uh for people that don't know
what the great filter is it's like why
are there no aliens trying to contact us
and the one potential punchline is that
there's a great filter could be AI could
be thermonuclear war but that just
nobody can get past it and so every
society goes so far and then stops
here's another interesting idea along
that which God so for people that know
Graham Hancock who just really believes
that there was a an ancient civilization
far older than we think uh and that it
it got obliter the Fingerprints of the
God's book well he's written a bunch of
books on this but the the most recent
thing was called ancient apocalypse so
he's been writing about it for I don't
know 30 years or something his books are
fascinating uh and he
he so plants that initial seed and then
again I don't know who said this this
was relayed to me by one of my employees
who was pulling wisdom from Twitter uh
and he said it is entirely possible that
AI really is the uh great filter go Burr
and that we have developed AI before and
every time we get to the point where AI
takes over much like in The Matrix we
end up uh relying on something in in
that movie they black in the sky but in
reality if if technology Rises AI robots
take over it could be a massive solar
flare that ends up then just
obliterating Ai and all the technology
and then we come up as a civilization
worshiping a sun god again because it
was like You Killed the [__] machines
thank you uh and I thought oh my God
like probably not true but the other one
I thought about is if you are this super
amazing civilization somewhere in the
far ends of the solar system not system
of wherever of nothingness and you
figured this out so what you would do is
you figure out that organically you have
to let something grow because this nice
kind of organic computer is much better
adaptation up to a point so why would
you not seed a billion
planets and one or two happen I mean and
and one or two spring life they'll all
be different but they'll all end up up
to your point before in a Ai and
machinery and maybe those things turn
organic eventually
because organic but with that kind of
augmentation so maybe we are that maybe
we were just planted maybe the bacteria
that started the Earth we just planted
on a billion planets and US happened to
be one of them by this amazing group of
whatever somewhere else who the hell
knows
right yeah okay so before we move on
because there's a whole another thing I
want to get into um I do want to wrap
this up with a bit of hope so thinking
about this a
lot I think that there is so you said
something uh I can't remember if you
said it to me or somebody else I've seen
so much of your content uh but you said
that that we're we're going to go
through a Renaissance and I think this
ties into what you were just saying
which is guys what what we're about to
live through maybe it's 10 years maybe
it's 100 years but we're we're going to
have a moment where you're going to be
able to utilize this to massively extend
your own capabilities Impossible Is
Possible The Impossible Is
Possible imagine that we've all grown up
with superhero films we've been given
it it's
amazing yeah this is going to be I think
uh it it already is so right now if I
can just get hyy for a second so at
impact
Theory we're we're a media company so
we're trying to improve the world
through ideas and entertainment and
they're two separate sides of the
company on the idea side that's you know
we've been talking a lot about that AI
is going to help you think through
things it's going to help you see around
corners it's going to find um signal in
noise patterns that we wouldn't
otherwise be able to put together but it
it also so R I can't tell you I I have
honestly lamented three things in my
life lament is the right word I have
lamented my limited intelligence I have
lamented my inability to sing and I have
lamented my inability to draw and those
are things that would make my life
better I'm a very excitable person so
take that you know with a grain of salt
but I we're using AI to help us create
project kaisen which for people that
don't know don't worry about it it's it
is a new form of video game
and I am limited my contributions are
limited by my ability to extract from my
head the the vision the literal visuals
and make them a thing and so there was a
part of the experience that I was like
okay we we have to move on we have to
keep going but it just wasn't good and
it didn't give me the visceral response
I wanted to feel when when I saw it and
then mid Journey comes along and I'm
like oh I I can actually now create the
thing that's in my head I can use text
to go this this is what I've been trying
to tell you and then no joke three days
later we we it's just so much better
it's unbelievable now we still had
humans had to go in and you basically
use it as art Direction but all that
frustration that I had of like not I'm
not feeling what want to feel and I'm
not talented enough to translate the
emotion into words to get an artist to
create the thing but through prompt
engineering I could and so finally I
could go this this is what I've been
trying to say that that is it felt like
a superpower it was one of the three
things that I have in fact I've never
put this together like this one of the
three things that I have lamented to a
god I don't technically believe in I
have lamented about not being able to
draw just to really make it simplistic
and I can now and I understand why that
makes artists mad but at the same time
this is amazing and for people that
lament that they don't have my verbal
ability you now can it's really and
because I'm not a person that gets
overly defensive about somebody else
getting good at my thing uh I'm just
excited it it really is as close two
superhero abilities as we're going to
get have you seen the music version so
one of my Lamentations is I love music I
just can't make it I can't play guitar
can't sing can't do anything but I know
in my
head what I'd want to create music from
and already again the stability AI
people have got a music version I think
Google have got one as well now coming
out where you can kind of say listen I
want that kind of deep Funk base but I
want to have X like this and this same
as you just did is you're getting at
your word vomit of how you're
visualizing it and it will make it so
there's hope for us yet Tom it'll train
well actually
autotune it could even true true true
that's that's humans being augmented by
machines because you look forward as a
macro guy and you have to like try to
make some sense of this I know it's to
be true that the only answer to a DE
Laden aging
population is what I refer to as more
cowbell stimulus stimulus is the status
quo that's why you like Bitcoin because
you can sense that stimulus is the
status quo the debasement of currency
it's the only way because GD if GDP
growth doesn't grow as fast as debt
growth your income is not covering your
payments right that's it's as simple as
that and the only way of juing GDP
growth in that formula
is debt so debt needs to grow the
economy needs to grow fast enough that
it pays it off but now each unit of debt
lowers the the uh each unit of debt
gives you less GDP than it did so it's
now $3 of debt gives you $1 of GDP
growth and it's been going like
this okay so if that is the construct
within which we live the
truth
then at some point if I look at the f F
and say I'm going to live in 9 months in
the
future is the Central Bank raising
interest rates there's almost a zero
chance
really well because we've already got to
the Tipping Point where inflation is
starting to fall just the extrapolation
of interest rates mean that they will be
below the FED funds rate by about March
or April next year so therefore and what
the FED going to go to what 10% what's
left Rubble people rioting in the
streets right you can't do it so you've
got to the point you're getting close to
the point where the rate of change
changes and in six to nine months time
the FED are likely to have stopped and
probably
cut because stimulus is the only way the
world works so they raise rates just to
lower them again correct so they lower
the rate of inflation but then it's like
oh [__] we need to bring up GDP growth
because if not we all go bust right and
we need asset prices to rise because you
can't let the collateral go bust that's
what's just happened in crypto the
collateral ft token the Luna token all
this stuff went bust end of game all the
leverage gets blown up so they can't
allow that so stimulus comes does that
work in the same way so what happened
for people that don't know what happened
with uh FTX there were people that
wanted to sell their ftt and get their
money out and they couldn't and so they
just paused sorry or whatever you had on
their exchange because they were off
gambling it so you wanted to get that
back you couldn't because they had used
it somewhere else now I'm
assuming that we have that same problem
of the government always has to be able
to buy the people that want to cash out
is that the issue no it's even a bigger
issue than that Tom if you borrow money
to buy a house and the value of your
house goes down
50% you're insolvent only if I want to
sell though if I don't need to sell I'm
fine yes that negative equity
means that the banks then
become
massively proactive in not doing any
more lending that was 2008 the
collateral went down so where what else
do we borrow against we borrow against
our future our
jobs I you go to the bank or use a
credit card it's because you got income
right you lose that that's your asset
your income that you generate right you
can't borrow money the whole system
blows up you can't pay any of your other
debts if
you're if the in the stock market in the
financial markets people borrow against
bonds and they borrow against stocks and
they borrow against all sorts of other
elements of wealth if those things go
down too
much then people start asking for their
money back because the the collateral
doesn't cover the
loan and that's the
issue that the society faces so it's at
every level
here um it can't happen so if your share
price goes down too much you probably
can't borrow money if you're a public
company because people then worry can
you pay them back your income goes down
all of this stuff so therefore I think
that as I said this is how the world
works is stimulus now in this particular
phase of the world and therefore looking
out nine months the probability is
knowing what we know about debt and
demographics that the central bank has
not only stopped raising rates but is
probably easing rates to try and balance
out as you talked about this is what you
want them to do right you want them to
try and just stop the worst part of the
collapse and the worst part of the boom
so they'll be doing that the probability
is is that they will also be trying to
inject money into the economy because
there's no velocity of money because
he's old people so that's quantitative
easing what does that do asset prices go
up
again so all roads lead to asset prices
going up over
time it's a trick because it's a
devaluing the value of the currency it's
a trick but then you've
got you've taken the BET and I've taken
the BET which is like we well we like
crypto because we think it not only
offsets this whole mechanism because
it's a fixed asset but it also has a
technology that we think unlocks a whole
bunch of other opportunities and
therefore it's valuable so that's
becomes a superior bet and I can't get
to a more Superior bet and I've tried
and I've gone through everything I just
WR huge long
60 page article about all of this in
global macro investor and I still can't
get to a position where in this
construct of the
world that Bitcoin ethereum just just
don't become even more and more dominant
and valuable how much do you think that
it's because sorry Tom just to go just
to clarify that for people one of the
reasons it's so valuable is like what
you're doing you're building this whole
kind of nft metap firste projects all
involved in blockchain right you're
building an applications layer on top of
the of the ecosystem whether it's
ethereum or whatever you're using right
but basically you've realized that you
want to build in this ecosystem that's
making ethereum or whatever you're doing
more
valuable and so it goes on yeah and
that's one of those things that uh
especially right now there's real
opportunity for Builders for sure I'm
actually really glad I'm heartbroken for
all the people that have lost but I'm
very glad that in my corner of the
blockchain world that the gamblers and
the people that were just there for the
money have been wiped out it no longer
feels like a Sound Investment for them
which is good because it shouldn't be
treated like an investment it should be
treated like you would treat uh an
interaction with Disney right it should
be emotion based it should be connection
with the IP anyway so that is very
interesting but even I like I'm
ultimately I'm chain agnostic so right
now we're building on ethereum so I
wonder is it Bitcoin or is it something
that mimics digital gold is it ethereum
or is it some other thing that has the
same kind of properties but better
adoption you know I don't know and I
don't care is the answer like you
because you'll move as you see it
happening yeah I'm agnostic too you know
just because I think that eth has the
superior benefits because you're
building on eth and we're at real vision
of building our nft community on eth now
whether you use polygon in the middle or
not don't really matter but you know I
see people doing it on salana okay
that's interesting there's not a lot of
people doing it on some chains and
Bitcoin nobody's doing it on at all
because you can't because no smart
contracts at scale but Bitcoin has this
other value proposition that's cool too
but um yeah I'm I'm agnostic but you
know our game I want to manifest My
Future Self my game is to back the right
horse which is what you're exactly doing
with your Bitcoin bet is you're saying
you know what this probably adds to my
real estate and the businesses that I'm
building and will help me deliver to
myself my promises now what do you think
about what Zuckerberg is doing with meta
do you think that's just insane the
amount of cash flow that he's pouring
into it or do you have a different take
he didn't have a
choice human interaction is going into
the
metaverse what that means to different
people is different things but it's
going to be a a more immersive 3D like
experience doesn't have to be VR could
be ar could be even just more 3D render
browser rendering kind of stuff that
ability to interact with humans in this
new very digital age I mean this is a
very 2D experience for
us and if there was a way that was a
little more 3D and we could have people
gathered around us listening in the same
room and we could see their faces um or
their pfps okay it feels more human
even though it sounds nonhuman it's
actually more
humanistic I think he realized
that that you are going to adapt or die
so he has to go through the s-curve
moment and take the big bet I think
he'll pull it off what does that mean
because people again immediately jump to
this dystopian Black Mirror Mark
Zuckerberg owns this whole metaverse
world it's not you know you and I will
have probably calls like this maybe in
his version of the metaverse or another
one and it it's like you use one email
server I use another I don't know what
you use I don't really care you you
might use Gmail and I use Outlook you
know it's we will just use whatever is
suitable and they will make tools that
are going to work really well for large
corporations people at scale people in
third world countries that don't get
access and so I think the probability of
success for him is is high and I think
the market is mispricing that
probability because what they've done is
taken cash flow out now to invest in the
future later and the investors like I
don't know if this is going to work
Amazon went through the same when they
did AWS everyone's like what the [__]
are you doing you're doing Cloud Server
when you you're a
retailer and they're like not really you
know we think there's a big opportunity
and they were right so um Apple's doing
the same bet with ar we just don't see
it yet but they've been plowing money
into it and Google have been doing this
forever with AI you know they've all
played they're all taking a different
path for this exponential age and
placing their bets at scale um because
if not they're out of the game yeah I
agree with that what what'll be very
interesting to see is given sentiment
given going back to what you said at the
beginning of the episode that you've
never seen a sentiment like this and
seeing how negative people are on crypto
when FTX blew up I was like oh my God
like this is really like sentiment was
already bad but this is really going to
get people just screaming that this is
all a scam and all that and I was like
okay as a builder I just keep coming
back to my thesis on what the technology
allows me to do and every time I look at
that I'm like part of me is excited that
so few people believe in it because I'm
just going to keep going keep building
and as long as we can cross the chasm
because you need to find ways to invite
people into that world and if they're
like you so averse to it that you can't
even get them to look at you you have a
problem I think that will be shortterm
measured in call it three to five years
but longterm term I agree that I think
that this is where people are going it
is the most logical outcome knowing what
I know about humans and what the
technology is going to be able to do and
watching Mark navigate this will be
really interesting because he's getting
pummeled by Wall Street they don't like
what he's doing he's lost a tremendous
amount of value but he has voting
control so it's a question of is he
going to stay that course and keep
building and is somebody bu building in
that same space I am so grateful for
what he's doing and I don't understand
other people in the space I mean I
suppose it's what you're saying about
they're worried about a black mirror
version of the world where you know some
big there a really noticeable thing and
I see it because I was the macro guy who
was always looking for the downside
because I just make money out of it and
I changed my my my thesis based on what
I was seeing in technology and all of
these things and this is probably the
solution and what I got back was a
respon that I did not expect which was
anger not debate not yeah not sure if
you're right anger and it took me by
surprise and I realized that change is
happening too
fast and it's happening too fast for the
investors in Facebook they can't assess
it so they either turn they you either
do what we're doing which is like we're
just going to embrace it we're just
going to move forwards let's see where
this crazy journey goes
and others look back and go I want those
white picket fences and my Mustang with
18 lit Mustang and I want
that because I can't deal with this they
are angry because their American
dream again it's the psychology of human
self has been
shattered they're still saying my future
is lies ahead but so if remember we
talked about at the peak and at the
bottom humans overe
extrapolate with emotion I'm now totally
basted on now I'm the richest man in the
world and so this societal change is
doing the same
thing and people just think this is the
end of the society that they understood
the American dream that they were given
and they don't want anything to do with
it and the rest of us are going actually
maybe that's a new exciting place and I
could both make money out of it and
enjoy it and go along for the ride and
see that and that is played out in
Twitter all day every day but it's it's
an amazing emotional
anger that I think is based on around a
mentality of a fix Pi versus a growing
Pi an infinite pi and those of us who
have started to look forward and now
firm Believers in the pi is probably
infinite depending how you address it
yeah talk to me more about that I have a
guess that this is going to go back to
what were saying about Robotics and Ai
and that you're getting more energy or
more GDP out of uh each kilog or I
forget the exact way that you said it
okay so let me let me go through this
the fix versus the the growth mentality
the fix mentality is if you dare use
another source of energy you're going to
rob us of the fossil fuel jobs and stuff
that we
have and that is bad as opposed to oh
well if it evolves we can probably get
more
energy than we you know per Kil we can
get more Kil out of a unit of energy if
we don't use fossil fuels that's
probably net big for society because you
could build more stuff and do more stuff
with it the fixed mindset is no you
can't replace fossil fuel with solar it
doesn't work the equation doesn't work
and I'm like you don't have to replace
it all we can have both but if it's not
such a large part and we can create
cheaper or more efficient energy
elsewhere net net the pie grows is it I
mean the central banks don't like like
to see their pie changing and their pie
is well there crypto it's a whole new
system of money so no no no no our pie
was this you can't just come in with
this new pie and we have it's exactly
what's happened yeah 2022 feels like the
rate of change has really accelerated
and I've started telling people hey
plant the flag in your mind 2022 was the
year that AI became really usable in
like a day-to-day person's life have you
seen the interview I did with Ed MC no
on real Vision tell me more oh my God
it's probably the best interview I've
ever
done um he's an old mate of mine who was
a global macro investor subscriber hedge
fund manager macro
guy he had done some other stuff and
he's been on real Vision a few times in
his old guys I saw him on Twitter
talking about AI so I'm like what the
[__] are you up to come and talk to me
on real vision and then he releases he'd
been kind of private what he was doing
and he's just built stability diffusion
and stability AI which is the larg and
Source open AI project in the entire
world because I've seen some of the uses
of that it's crazy so he compressed
every image that ever existed on the
internet down to a 2 gigabyte file
what and he's doing it with music he's
doing it with video
he's doing it the written word
so open AI is one of them Google has got
their other version Deep Mind and his is
the open source version which is
terrifying because it means it's
Unstoppable but it's it's mind BL so
you've got to watch the interview
because like you I kind of thought I had
a handle on how fast this is moving my
whole
interview mad e m a d mustac m o s t a
qu U e he said Brit hedge fund manager
not the guy you'd imagine is going to do
this he's just raised his first hundred
million
rounds he's only been going for two
years Tom wow he built his own
supercomputer and he wasn't the richest
dude in the world he was just an
ordinary
guy in two
years and even Sergey Brin and everybody
went to his launch and everyone's Jaws
to the floor saying holy [__] this has
just changed everything
yeah so obviously I follow what people
are using Ai and media for we've
actually started using it here at impact
Theory to amazing results and I've
started seeing people showing oh we're
using stable diffusion here's what we
got but I didn't even know what stable
diffusion was I didn't know I knew it
was AI but that's all I know about it
and the results are astonishing and as a
creative What it lets you do dude when I
think back even 10 years let alone 20
years
bro when I was in film school we edited
on Steam Becks it was a gigantic metal
contraption that you cut like with uh
basically scissors and taped it back
together like I'm not that old so the
fact that we've come that far to now
seeing people do stuff with stable
diffusion and turn literally instantly
turn like a person moving into an
animated cartoon it's
unbelievable so as a creative I love
it two years old Tom he's like we barely
started and what he did the cck trick
that he did that the others didn't do
the others all went this is too powerful
of Technology we're not going to give it
out to everybody so we'll give bits of
it out like
gpt3 and he's like it's too powerful of
Technology not to give it to
everybody so then you've got 10,000
people building already on top of what
he's built so it's just going to be like
a virus now it's just going to explode
wow and now to think through that one
is we are this is what I've been begging
on Twitter we are in urgent need for
digital ID blockchain driven digital ID
because this interview can be done with
by AI just ingest all of your interviews
all of my interviews and say hey get Tom
and R to talk about societal collapse or
whatever it is right I've already did
you hear the Rogan and jobs interview I
mean look it's obviously early days but
how well they captured the vocality
especially of Rogan where when he would
be like trailing off the AI would Trail
off now my only beef with AI in its
current Inception is that they always
feel like they're about to make a point
but they never quite make the point but
I mean if that's where we're at now
where are we going to be in 20 years
it'll be insane
insane and so think of societal stress
when you don't know a single thing what
is true and what is not right and that
is not happening in five years time or
10 years time that's happening next year
you know GPT 4 comes out next year and
gpt3 is so powerful anyway I hate to
think what GPT 4 is
like so nothing we read nothing we watch
nothing we
hear is verified from it source of Truth
any longer so we so urgently need a
system of authentication so anything
that appears with you will have the
token that I can scan or do whatever
check in my browser to know yes this is
authentic Tom or this is AI Tom and
maybe you've got your own AI Tom and
that's okay but you need to know what's
authentic Tom and what's AI Tom in two
years time we're going to break Society
unless we do this because we need to go
through the elections in the United
States with
AI dude so this to your point the other
day Lisa came over my wife and I was was
showing her my Tik Tok feed and I was
like hey do you think this guy's
attractive and she's like yeah and I he
was probably like 25 something like that
and I said would you believe me if I
said that he was 35 years old and she's
looking closely and she's like I guess
and I said would you believe me if I
said that's not a human that's Ai and
she was like what she had no idea she's
looking right at him trying to like
judge his age and had no idea he's not
real and this was a video man it wasn't
even a still it was a video of him
speaking and she didn't realize that it
AI I was like oh my God like this is
yeah to your point we're going to need
something to authenticate and also it's
just as again somebody that builds a
media company the thought of being able
to create characters where I can like
give them backstory motivation all that
and then another character backstory
motivation all that and then put them
together and they will react in a way
that surprises me now it's like you can
get into creating these very rich
surprising experiences yeah but you know
where that leads to right you give a
character a backstory and it lives now
of course it right now we're not at the
point where it's conscious but it lives
enough that it writes its own story yeah
and all the characters write those
stories where does that story go we
don't know we've already seen that
Microsoft AI that they tried to put on
Twitter and it became a Nazi within a
week and they were like oh dear we need
to stop so it's just it's
it's fascinating right so what you're
creating now literally could have a life
of its own yeah I mean look as a writer
that's always the fantasy now do I want
them to become conscious beings I don't
know about that but for them to be able
to surprise me that would be I mean that
dude but what if they get their own
followers they don't have to be
conscious they just have to be
Ai and they have their own followers and
they start developing a political
opinion based on their interaction with
followers and before you know it they're
they've now got a million followers
they're more powerful than Tom and
they're now trying to influence
elections yeah it's crazy it's crazy I
mean so I it sounds crazy but it's it's
gonna happen right it will you'll be
able to put guard rails in and so this
is where now of course some people
aren't going to and they're going to
have ai That Goes Bananas 100% there's
no doubt and there are going to be some
people that like that they're AI so it's
not even like oh well people know it's
say I and they will ignore them no they
won't so for sure there's no doubt but
to the double-edged side of that sword
as a creative somebody thinking about
making immersive worlds it it I I am now
completely in your Camp I've never
thought about it as a Renaissance but
you're absolutely right before this all
the counter Peg explodes it's going to
be pretty amazing so here's another
thing for you is my strong belief is
that Elon Musk did not buy Twitter
because he wants to own social
media once you see AI you cannot unsee
it once you see the robots you cannot
unsee them so he has built cars with
self-driving AI right and it's still
obviously developing but it's developing
fast he then is developing the Optimus
robot yet again everyone's saying it's
never going to happen of course it's
going to happen how many things does a
guy have to do before people go wow he's
really capable of pulling things off and
even if he doesn't do it somebody else
will so what is the next step right your
character that you're building your
characters right how do you give them
personality the biggest way of having a
robot that can make you tea or do
whatever or you sender Mars and it can
be building a civilization in
Mars is by feeding it
Twitter because you've got all of
humanity losing its mind loving hating
scamming all of humanities there and
then the next thing he says is what I'd
love to do is add video well because Tik
Tok has been doing this they've been
scraping the AI for the Chinese state so
it appears for facial recognition and
human understanding and AI tools and the
other thing he talked about was I'd love
to get long form content we like all of
those things video long form content
short form what he gets is all elements
of
humanity to train AI
from I'd pay if you were the richest man
in the world and you're building Ai and
you're building robots and you're
building all this stuff would you pay 44
billion for the largest proprietary data
pool in the world should you want it if
you know how to monetize it for sure
well and I think he's he's gonna go even
farther than that he's I mean this is
one of those when people tell you what
they're doing it's probably best to
believe them especially when they have a
track record like that he's I'm going to
create the ultimate payment platform I'm
G to make the WeChat of the West and if
he can pull that off it becomes so much
bigger than what it's been thus far
it'll be very interesting to watch this
happen and also the um the the other
thing is that
he has just fired got rid of about 90%
of the staff yeah don't realize I can
see people saying well well Twitter
won't be here tomorrow it's not like
Twitter is people pedling behind the
scenes it's technology it actually
doesn't need the humans to run it on a
day-to-day basis apart from to fix a few
bugs but it's not like it bugs every day
so he gets to rebuild it to hear more
about Ray Delio's warning on the
upcoming recession which we're almost
certainly already in watch the full
episode here talk to me about the three
forces that you see that are influencing
this moment we've got Banks collapsing
US dollars under attack uh looming
recession what